Perhaps it is fortunate that Arac is overstating the case. The
theoretical problem of Chinese culture since the 1980s, after all, does
not fall into the simple binary of a full-blown adoption of global
postmodernism on the one hand, and the non-existence of postmodernism on
the other. The ingenuities of the cultural theorists of this period,
indeed, lie in the different intermediary positions between these poles.
Virtually nobody is interested in theorizing a global postmodernism in
China wholesale; instead, by arranging their theories of culture at
different scales, each of them offers a distinct picture of Chinese
culture on every geographical level while coexisting with rival or even
contradictory theories with surprising coherence. A tiered conception of
Chinese culture---both the fact that the theorists offer frameworks on
different geographic scales, and the phenomenon that Chinese culture
does exhibit different characteristics depending on where the observer
looks---does not arise out of its own accord, but reflects a common
material condition, namely, the condition of uneven development. The
term, as it comes down to the present form from Marx and Trotsky, gains
its precise socioeconomic definition today from David Harvey, who
promotes it to one of the inherent mechanisms with which capitalism
overcomes its boom-and-bust cycles. Harvey argues that capitalism,
because of its periodic fluctuations between supply and demand, creates
immense amounts of surplus value in more developed geographic regions,
which then needs to be reinvested in less developed regions to avert
crisis. The less developed regions, gaining the influx of capital and
therefore more advanced infrastructure, higher-educated labor and more
technologically advanced products, can seem to be accelerating its
development to draw "even" with the more developed regions. However,
"the means to achieve that end entail the production of new geographic
differentiations which form new spatial barriers to be overcome"
[@harvey 417]. Thus capitalism depends on the unevenness in development
between geographic regions to maintain its stability and expand its
production.

When one adapts Harvey's conception of uneven development to the Chinese
case, one finds that uneven development is enshrined on the level of
national economic policy, so much so that Kyle A. Jaros calls it "uneven
developmentalism" instead. The Chinese market reform, indeed, is
accompanied by Deng Xiaoping's famous dictum: "Let some of us get rich
first, so that those who get rich first can help others get rich later."
Those who "got rich first," further, reside predominantly in the 14
special economic zones, most of which are located along the coast or
close to Hong Kong, to take advantage of their proximity to
international trade routes and attract foreign capital. Jaros further
argues that "[s]ince the 1950s, policymakers have worked to foster
economic 'growth poles'"---regions that are significantly more developed
than its neighboring areas---while making "the distributing of cities
and industry across the country more 'rational,'" mirroring the process
that Harvey identifies, where less developed regions struggle to draw
even with the "growth poles" [@jaros 27]. Deng's "spatial policy," then,
is a particularly well-executed employment of uneven development in the
Chinese context, harnessing the dynamics it creates to propel market
reform forward. The result, other than a massive growth in Chinese GDP,
is "yawning socioeconomic gaps" between cities and countrysides, and
between coastal regions and the inlands. [@jaros 52] These extreme cases
of unevenness in material distribution makes it possible for a host of
mutually contradicting modes of production to coexist in China since the
1980s, where special economic zones such as Shanghai and Guangzhou would
have skyscrapers and supermarkets, and where rural countrysides would
remain relatively undisturbed in their residual socialist, or sometimes
even feudal, economic structures.

Convincingly, then, Chinese theorists have argued that the material
condition of post-market-reform China is, instead of uniformly
postmodern, the condition of uneven development. If one believes that
the material structure determines or, at least, exerts profound
influence on cultural formations, then it seems important to ask what
the cultural logic of uneven development is. Haomin Gong, in his book
*Uneven Modernity*, identifies acutely three critical paradigms, all of
which take uneven development as their premise: "'alternative
modernities,' 'Chinese postmodernity,' and 'Postsocialism'"
[-@haomin-gong 4]. Reordered on a scale from local to global cultural
formations, it appears that "Chinese postmodernity," which I will in
subsequent arguments call "local postmodernism," seeks to describe the
presence of global postmodern trends in limited locales such as Beijing,
Shanghai and Guangzhou, but does not explain---and, at times, highlights
its own incapacity to explain---the culture of regions outside these
overdeveloped metropolises. "Postsocialism," a term coined by Arif
Dirlik to characterize a *national* culture precariously defining itself
against its socialist heritage and a full-scale adoption of liberal
capitalism. "Alternative modernities" seems to be the closest
formulation to explore the global valence of Chinese culture, accepting,
on the one hand, China's increasing integration into global capitalism,
and proposing that Chinese modernities, with its specific conditions,
can offer alternatives for Western notions of modernity. Insofar as I am
nevertheless interested in theorizing global postmodernism as the
defining feature of post-market-reform China, it is necessary, for now,
to discuss each of these three paradigms in turn, and catalog the
cultural trends they illuminate or do not illuminate.

It is not hard to imagine how a local postmodernism might exist in
China. Arif Dirlik and Zhang Xudong gives an apt description of it:
"[C]ities such as Shanghai, Beijing and Shenzhen, now with cityscapes
punctuated by the golden arches of McDonald's and giant Panasonic
advertisements, are nothing more than enclaves of a global consumer
society" [-@dirlik-zhang 6]. The implication that these cities are
"enclaves," bearing little to no relationship with the rural inlands,
also means that the cultural production of metropolitan cities tend to
develop asynchronously from the rest of China, resembling mainstream
forms of global literature and art while inspiring little resonance in
the rural population. This formulation of local postmodernism, then,
fits perfectly the famous Beijing-based writer Wang Shuo 王朔, who, in
addition to occupying the top of the bestseller list with his novels for
years on end, is also a prolific screenwriter, adapts multiple novels of
his own into films and TV shows of global acclaim, and even establishes
the legal precedent in 1992 for collecting royalty interest from his
publishing house rather than selling his works upfront. It has become
routine, especially in Western academia, to associate Wang Shuo's name
with "hooligan literature." What is not immediately obvious from the
term, however, is that Wang Shuo's "hooliganism" denotes a coming
together of two contrasting social circumstances. On the one hand, the
characters of Wang Shuo represents a new generation of Chinese city
dwellers, usually in their twenties and predominantly men, who no longer
have the stability of career that the Party offered them in the previous
generation, and therefore roam the streets wantonly, participate in gang
activities, or engage in one-off, questionable business ventures. On the
other hand, these young men are able to roam the streets without a job
while not falling into abject poverty, because they are, more often than
not, the offspring of high-ranking Party cadres, and therefore inherits
considerable wealth and the social status of the revolutionary
generation. Wang Shuo's own identity becomes important here: his parents
were military officials of the PLA, and he grew up---like many of his
characters did---in military compounds. The unique political identity of
Beijing, the capital of the People's Republic, is also important, since
proximity to the central government means that there are clusters of
second-generation revolutionaries, whose economic and cultural
activities carve out their own space in the cityscape. "Hooligan
literature," then, represents a peculiar cross-section of Beijing,
a petite bourgeoisie of sorts, which constructs its identity against
what Maurice Meisner calls the "bereaucratic bourgeoisie" and the high
cultural elites among them, but who are nevertheless unwilling to be
integrated into a much lower social stratum that occupies the same
space: beggars, prostitutes, blue-collar workers, etc.

One of Wang Shuo's earlier novellas published in 1987, "Wan Zhu 顽主,"
has this same cast of hooligan protagonists. The title poses a problem
of translation, which merits a detour. The story is about a newly
founded company called "3T," whose motto is "help others' difficulties,
relieve others' boredom, and take the blame for others' mistakes."[^1]
"T," here, is homophonous with the Chinese character "ti 替," or
"substitute," and what the protagonists actually do in the company is to
get paid for substituting for other roles in their customers' lives:
acting out the husband for a saleswoman on the brink of divorce, taking
a beating from a depressed, suicidal man, and, rendered most
extravagantly, hosting a fake award ceremony for an amateur writer.
"Substitution," it is already clear, happens not only within the plot of
the story, when characters pretend to be someone else, but also happens
on the level of the text itself, between pairs of homophones: "T"
substituting for "substitution." The English rendition of the title
usually follows the story's 1988 film adaptation and reads "The
Operators," which is woefully inadequate. "Wan Zhu," in common Beijing
slang, means something like "master of the hooligans," the character
"wan" denoting meanings such as "wanton" or "frivolous." But this "wan
顽" is also homophonous with another "wan 玩," which means "play," and
thus the title reads "the master of play." To illustrate that the story
does seem to have the poststructuralist concept of "play" [*jeu*] or
"freeplay" in mind, it is worth examining a section of the novella,
where the language begins to imitate a Joycean modernism. Yang Zhong, an
operator for 3T, is struggling to maintain a conversation with
a customer whom he calls a "modernist woman." After going through
virtually every Western philosopher available to him (neglecting
Nietzsche, with whom he is unfamiliar) Yang turns the topic to Freud:

> "You must really want to marry your mother."
> 
> "No no. My father married my mother. I can't marry my mother first
> without having my father marry my mother. Doesn't work."
> 
> "I'm not saying you're marrying your mom. Violates social norms.
> Nobody should marry their own mom. Incestuous. I'm saying that you
> want to marry your mom but can't because of your dad unless castrated
> useless because of moral ethics so you're in pain you're attracted to
> no one only want to marry your mom but can't because of your dad how
> am I repeating myself I can't explain it either it's just like this
> anyhow those foreign quote books says looking for a partner is really
> looking for your mom."
> 
> "But my mom has a blind eye."
>
> "If his [*sic*] mom does not have a blind eye he won't marry his mom
> to give birth to a younger brother or sister because before he can
> castrate his dad his dad will castrate him because his dad has eight
> buns for one meal and one whole kilogram of pork and works for the
> breeding station castrated tens of thousands of pigs slick with it no
> need for knife squeeze with his hands and the pair of balls comes out
> the Japanese all call him respectfully Talo Testicles."[^2]

\noindent
Much can be gleaned from this hilarious rhetorical flourish, but for the
present purpose it is significant to note that this exchange happens "by
an ice cream stand in a cinema with colored advertisements," and that
Yang Zhong learns about Freud through a "foreign quote
book"---reminiscent of the "Little Red Book" during the Cultural
Revolution, whose proper name is *Chairman Mao's Quote Book*. The same
format, in the new era, bears Freudian doctrines and is sold in mass
market copies as fashionable commodities. The most important object of
commodification, however, is Yang's language itself, which is used to
appease a customer who previously consumed much of the modernist
discourse, and now seeks similar validation from Yang. Humor becomes
commodity in the double sense that Yang is using his witticism, albeit
increasingly incoherent and running out of steam, to woo his customer,
and that the reader of Wang Shuo's story, consuming the language, buys
into and is captivated by this parody of modernism---until, that is,
Yang produces a quite violent imagery of castration, whereby the parody
begins to read like pastiche. But the most significant break with
modernism is that the unpunctuated torrent of language, in Wang Shuo,
does not function as a stream of consciousness or an interior monologue,
but is instead spoken as dialogue explicitly and performatively,
yielding no insight, contrary to Joyce, of the inner psyche of the
characters. Indeed, a lack of insight into what the characters are
thinking and feeling, coupled with an oversaturation of rhetorical
display, characterizes the majority of Wang Shuo's novellas written
about this same host of hooligans. What results from this is a distinct
image of the petite bourgeoisie in Beijing under market reform,
psychologically hollow, repressed or impoverished, all the while being
bombarded with the latest commodities---ice creams, films, Freud,
language---that a free market has to offer.

"Wan Zhu," like many other stories of Wang Shuo, is driven almost
exclusively by dialogues. Especially when the narrator drops out all
denotations for who is saying what, much like some of the dizzying
dialogues in Henry James' novels, the story reads like running
theater productions ("play")[^3] detached from time and located merely
in space, as if the readers are listening in, voyeuristically, to the
background chatter of the city. The theatrical quality of Wang Shuo's
fiction lends itself, naturally, to numerous box office miracles in the
nascent Chinese film industry. His faithfulness to the everyday speak of
Beijing is also admirably timeless, such that a present-day reader of
Wang Shuo, visiting Beijing for the first time, can hear the signature
rhythm and cadence of of Wang's characters the moment they step out of
the train and climb into the backseat of a taxi. It is not an
unreasonable hypothesis, finally, that Wang Shuo's commercial success
depends on a growing readership intimate with the experience of living
in a metropolis, a population that China's economic growth supplies. The
all-encompassing commodification within these cities, further, destroys
what is left of an ideological center---the socialism of a failed
experiment---in the linguistic structure, thus making the "freeplay" of
all signifiers possible.

It would seem, then, that the metropolitan postmodernism that Wang Shuo
represents is limited to cities. Like "enclaves of a global consumer
society," local postmodernism of Wang Shuo's variety does not exert much
influence in the Chinese countryside. Indeed, the Nobel laureate Mo Yan
莫言, publishing his first works around the same time as Wang Shuo,
persistently represents a rural village in the Chinese northeaast that
could not look more different from Beijing. But before examining his
most famous work, *The Red Sorghum Family* 红高粱家族, it is worth
giving a few preliminary remarks. First, it is easy to fall into an
anachronism when discussing Mo Yan's rural landscape, since, in *The Red
Sorghum Family*, he does not describe the unevenly developed countryside
during the market reform, but rather his own hometown, experienced by
his father's generation, before the founding of the People's Republic
and during the Second World War. Because of this, second, *The Red
Sorghum Family* is sometimes characterized by critics as an example of
the Lukáscian historical novel, where a middle-of-the-way protagonist,
standing at the intersection of residual and emergent historical forces,
witnesses the structural changes of a society. If *The Red Sorghum
Family* is a historical novel, however, it must be a strange historical
novel indeed, since the town remains in virtual stasis despite
undergoing the fall of the late Qing Dynasty, the Japanese invasion, the
rule of the puppet government and the influx of Communist militia. One
might even go so far as to claim that to show the town's socioeconomic
stasis is precisely the point of Mo Yan's literary endeavor, to
demonstrate, in other words, how the traditional mode of Chinese rural
existence has a vitality and resilience well beyond the influence of
political change. This dynamic between a town embedded in history and
a town outside history, in short, the contradiction between literary
historicism and ahistoricism, is one of the most prominent features of
Mo Yan's fiction, and allows him to jump from the revolutionary period
in *The Red Sorghum Family* to the post-revolutionary period in *Frog*,
while maintaining a recognizably self-same image of his favorite town.

The question, nevertheless, is what the experience of
a post-market-reform China does to the memory of a revolutionary China.
The narrator gives an answer in the opening section of the book:

> I used to love the Northeast Gaomi Township with all my heart; I used
> to hate the Northeast Gaomi Township with all my heart. After I have
> grown up and endeavored to learn Marxism, I finally realized: the
> Northeast Gaomi Township is no doubt the most beautiful and the most
> ugly, the most transcendent and the most worldly, the most virgin and
> the most filthy, the most heroic and the most bastardly, the
> hardest-drinking and hardest-loving place on this planet.

\noindent
One wonders if the historical materialism of Marxism, which the narrator
claims he "endeavored to learn," has any impact on his impression of the
Gaomi Township whatsoever. The shift from before to after a Marxist
education runs parallel to the shift from subjective judgment ("love ...
with all my heart ... hate ... with all my heart") to what sounds like
an objective observation ("the Northeast Gaomi Township *is* no doubt
..."). But the observation does not turn out, as Marxist materialism
demands, to be the ontological status of material structures, but
instead returns to an aesthetic judgment ("the most beautiful and the
most ugly").[^4] What is preserved from Marxism, then, is a vertiginous
fluctuation between dialectical extremes, from one superlative to
another, so much so that the content of the superlatives rapidly cancels
each other, leaving behind only the formal structure of the superlative
itself: the Northeast Gaomi Township is the site of superlatives. Once
detached from material referents and operating on the level of
aesthetics or even linguistics, the superlatives illuminates in turn
that "Marxism," here, is in fact a stand-in for the Great Leap Forward
or the Cultural Revolution, during which the narrator would have
received his education. The intensity of the superlatives is then
a blank parody of the highfalutin grand narratives of Mao's China,
either of the extravagant political propaganda for increased
agricultural production, or in the revolutionary romanticism, the
Party's ordained literary genre, extolling heroic figures larger than
life.

The realist heritage of Chinese literature, now pushed to the extreme by
Mo Yan, depicts revolutionary heroes in a different light. It is quite
impossible to be a casual reader of Mo Yan for this reason: his
characters not only escapes the easy categorization of good versus evil
("the most heroic *and* the most bastardly"), but also uniformly suffer
from, and demonstrate an almost pathological interest in, the most
extreme forms of violence, bodily mutilation, torture and gore. The
narrator often spends considerable effort describing the exact way that
a bullet enters its victim's eye socket and leaves their skull,
fracturing the entire face. The central motif of the story, the red
sorghum, grows most ferociously in the Township into a "blood ocean,"
and is persistently associated with blood and violence, life and death.
The first time one reads the description of the narrator's father
walking through the sorghum field, one gets the imagery of "three
hundred fellow villagers, their heads pillowed on their arms, their
bodies strewn across the ground, their fresh blood oozing to irrigate
the vast field of sorghum, mudding the soil into black earth that slows
one's walk. The scent of sweetness is suffocating." The most heroic
character, Uncle Arhat, was captured by the Japanese invaders and
managed to escape briefly, crippling two of their mules. He then
receives the most gory description of his death, tied to the rack before
the whole village, castrated and skinned alive---the narrator spares no
graphic details. These extremely faithful descriptions of violence,
then, is a realism in the superlative, a realism in excess.[^5] The
aesthetic experience of reading the novel---watching, for example, the
body of one's beloved character being ruthlessly torn apart---is
something like the experience of a Kantian sublime, where the pleasure
is motivated by the pain of comprehending and imagining that which lies
beyond one's cognitive capacity. Mo Yan's fluctuation between
superlatives does leave one feel, reeling from the sea of red sorghums
after closing the book, as if they have caught a glimpse of the
incomprehensible: the atrocity of the Japanese invasion, the infinite
vitality of the Gaomi Township, the essence of life and love itself.

It is possible that one recoils from this experience of the sublime,
which breaks with the function of the historical novel altogether.
Contemporary readers, alarmed by the sheer barbarity of bodily violence,
might imagine the Gaomi Township as a place lost in the past, which has
nothing to do with the "socialist new countryside" of the present:
"Thank god we have none of the problems of the past!", meaning that the
material progress of the market reform has produced a more peaceful,
more civilized society. Mo Yan, meanwhile, in his typical dialectical
fashion, has his narrator pronounce a Benjaminian sentiment: "With
progress, I feel intimately the regression of our genes." That the
present China, despite material progress, is nevertheless a genetic
regression, might be explained by the fact that post-revolutionary China
no longer has the vitality of life, the same passion for love, as the
Gaomi Township in the hight of an anti-imperial war had. But either of
these historical ruptures of an irrevocable past severed from the
present can be mended through the concept of uneven development, if one
realizes that residual forms of Mo Yan's town, in social structures or
in desires and imaginations, still exerts influence today and might be
reawakened in the future. It is by bringing the vital image of the past
back to the present, in any case, that Mo Yan commits the most extreme
case of violence in his story, which, perhaps not surprisingly, is
a violence against the story itself. The first section of the novel ends
with a disturbing dedication:

> With this text I summon all the wandering spirits above the endless
> red sorghum field of my hometown. I am your unfaithful son. I am
> willing to tear out my heart marinated in soy sauce, dice it into
> three bowls, and place it in the sorghum field as an offering. Please
> partake of it! Partake of it!

\noindent
The cannibalistic image doubles its power once the reader realizes that
they are themselves consuming the story, and thereby the narrator's
"heart"---his overflowing emotions, his faithfulness to depicting the
real.[^6] The consumption of literature by contemporary readers, then,
is just as violent an act as the ostensibly bygone era of barbarism. The
violence towards language, a kind of postmodernism itself,[^7] thus
generates a dialectical critique of the consumer culture of the
post-market-reform China and the superlatives of the revolutionary
China. Mo Yan creates a sublime from which one recoils, but the
complacent gesture of recoiling, or retreating into a "progressive,"
"civilized" present, becomes just as questionable.

[^1]: "替人解难替人解闷替人受过。" The motto alliterates on the
  character "ti 替," hence the company name "3T."

[^2]: Translations in this chapter, unless otherwise noted, are mine.

[^3]: This meaning of "play" as a theater production is not available in
  the Chinese "顽" or "玩", although Wang Shuo does know English.

[^4]: It is perhaps indicative that Howard Goldblatt, translating the
  book to English, neglects the narrator's comment on Marxism
  altogether.

[^5]: *The Red Sorghum Family* was written before Mo Yan read Gabriel
  García Márquez, and so the literary genre of "magical realism" was not
  available to him then. Still, supernatural occurrences in other parts
  of the story suggest that Mo Yan, unknowingly, might already be
  enacting the genre.

[^6]: Tearing one's heart out, in traditional Chinese symbolism, means
  telling the truth.

[^7]: This overhasty suggestion might not be so outrageous if one
  considers "magical realism" to be a literary genre that emerges within
  postmodernism, employing postmodernist devices while resuscitating
  a sense of history.
