China, one might remember, is inserted into Jameson's inaugural account
of postmodernism in a curious way, namely, as the title of a poem that
begins: "We live on the third world from the Sun. Number Three. Nobody
tells us what to do" [@PM 29]. Jameson, analyzing the poem, almost seems
poised to give preliminary remarks on the theoretical project of Chinese
postmodernism itself: "\[The poem\] does seem to capture ... the signal
event ... of a collectivity which has become a new 'subject of history,'
and which, after the long subjugation of feudalism and imperialism,
again speaks in its own voice, for itself, as if for the first time"
[@PM 29]. It is unfortunate, however, that this poem called "China" is
written by a San-Francisco-based poet, whose inspiration has nothing to
do with the really existing China, but rather comes from "strolling
through Chinatown" and looking through "a book of photographs whose
idiogrammatic captions remained a dead letter to him" [@PM 30]. China,
here, is at least three times displaced: one sees it through the
displacement of Chinatown, through a book of photographs in Chinatown,
through a poem about the photographs, and perhaps also through Jameson's
interpretation of the poem. In Sheldon Lu's terms, "China" in this
account is the "absent object," a signifier detached from its signified,
and whose helpless detachment is the real objective of Jameson's
analysis in the first place. [@sheldon-lu 114]

But for scholars of Chinese contemporary culture, whose interest is
still piqued by however displaced a reference, an investigation of
Chinese postmodernism surely does not stop there. Indeed, such a
theoretical project should, "after the long subjugation of feudalism and
imperialism, again \[speak\] in its own voice, for itself." What does it
mean, then, to theorize a Chinese postmodernism? What does it look like,
and how might it differ from Jameson's primarily Euro-American vision of
postmodernity?

Something strange must have happened in the discussions of these
questions, then, that makes an onlooker, after reading the staunchest
defenders of Chinese postmodernism, wonder if there is a postmodernism
in China after all. One after another, the arguments begin to read like
bad cases of cognitive dissonance. Wang Ning, for example, argues in his
essay, "The Mapping of Chinese Postmodernity," that "\[postmodernism\]
can never become a cultural dominant in Asian or Third World countries
... Postmodernism will remain secondary, no matter how influential it is
at the moment" [@wang-ning 36]. What Wang calls "primary," by contrast,
is "mainstream culture and the dominant ideology," which remains
unidentified in his essay. [@wang-ning 36] The logical next step for
Wang would be to extend his argument by broaching what "mainstream
culture" and "dominant ideology" is, demonstrate how the secondary
position of postmodernism can be subsumed under the primary paradigm,
and forego the postmodernism framework itself. Instead, Wang nonetheless
concludes that "a mapping of postmodernity is both historically
necessary and culturally significant" [@wang-ning 22]. His workaround
for theorizing Chinese postmodernism's historical necessity and cultural
significance is to identify 8 forms of global postmodernism "within the
scope of literature and culture alone," and 6 versions of postmodernism
in contemporary Chinese culture, with the confusing addendum, first,
that "some of these versions of postmodernity have already been
relegated to the past and will be of significance only to researchers of
literary and cultural history," and, second, that the 6 versions of
Chinese postmodernism are "unlike the eight forms of postmodernism
I have described in accordance with international criteria." [@wang-ning
28] It is unclear what the so-called "international criteria" is,
especially since Jameson's postmodernism is not exactly a universally
accepted paradigm. And pedagogical functions aside, one cannot help
getting a sense of the Sisyphean task of keeping a list of Chinese
postmodernisms whose items are constantly being "relegated to the past,"
not to mention the bewildering idea of playing combinatorics with the
mismatched international and Chinese versions of postmodernism so that
one might even begin to explore how or why they misalign. To be sure,
the scholarly endeavor of tracking down and summarizing different
positions of postmodernism is immense and certainly deserves applause,
but postmodernism as a "cultural logic," in this process of enumeration,
becomes so fractured and unwieldy that it is no longer operable, and
certainly not operable to Jameson's theoretical goals.

The apparent incoherence between a postmodernism that looks so different
in China that one might as well abandon the project, and the almost
heroic insistence that there is nevertheless a postmodernism in China,
does not come from Wang's own argumentative deficiency, but reflects
instead a field of study where virtually everyone is plagued by the same
conundrum. Ping-hui Liao, investigating postmodernism in Taiwan, notes
that "if the postmodernism craze in Taiwan sprang up like 'bamboo shoots
after the rain,' it soon declined and virtually disappeared ... It was
as if the age of post-postmodernism had arrived overnight---even before
postmodernism took root in Taiwan," but then concludes, somehow, that
"the postmodern condition in Taiwan is far from over." [@pinghui-liao
70, 85] The certainty in his conclusion, at least, should give one
pause---what happened to the apparent evidence to the contrary, for
instance, the delightful beer house in Taipei called "Postmodernism
Graveyard"? [@pinghui-liao 70] Sheldon Lu, similarly, argues that "the
avant-garde is a distinct feature of Chinese postmodernism," despite his
knowledge that "postmodernism as we know it in the West implies the
'silence of the avant-garde'" [@sheldon-lu 115]. Jameson, I should note,
does not quite argue that the avant-garde no longer exists in
postmodernism, but believes that the institutional status of
deconstruction and New Historicism preserves them "where they are no
longer supposed to exist" [@PM xvi]. But then Lu's gesture of promoting
the avant-garde to an emblem of Chinese postmodernism amounts to almost
a similar institutionalizing gesture, a problem which merits more
comments below. Wang Fengzhen, writing "Third-World Writers in the Era
of Postmodernism," paradoxically picks "a recent prize-winning movie"
*The Accused Stubborn Old Uncle* as an example of postmodern culture,
which, it turns out, represents an almost feudal configuration of the
Chinese rural social structure. [@wang-fengzhen 54] This makes Jonathan
Arac wonder "if this point of Wang's is a quiet disagreement with
Fredric Jameson," who argues that postmodernism can only occur after
modernization is complete, and certainly after feudal modes of
production are cleared away. [@arac 139]

Arac's response to the 1995 Dalian conference, then, can be understood
as a genuine frustration towards this kind of cognitive dissonance: "Has
global capital fully penetrated an economy in which in 1994 I could not
buy an international airline ticket with an American Express card but
only in cash in Chinese currency? ... Assessing the situation as
presented by the essays, and I have no competence to underwrite any
claim to see beyond them, *postmodernity is not the condition of China*"
[@arac 144\; emphasis added]. That was, of course, 1994, but an
*American* Express card, if I may report on my anecdotal experience in
2019, is still only accepted in tourist-filled hotels and restaurants,
which in turn makes this anecdote of Arac's sound too much like the new
marketing pitch for U.S. based, transnational corporations such as Visa
or Mastercard. For a more recent report from a visiting U.S. academic,
though, J. Hillis Miller notes in 2014 that "Chinese young people are
not reading the Chinese *Classic of Poetry*, or *The Dream of the Red
Chamber*, or the works of Lu Xun, any more than American young people
\[are\] reading Shakespeare, Jane Austen, or Toni Morrison" [@miller
190]. This account would seem to draw a parallel between Chinese youth
and their American, postmodern counterpart, except that Lu Xun writes in
the tradition of critical realism under the intellectual milieu of the
May Fourth Movement of 1919, and according to the orthodox periodizing
scheme, before one get to postmodernism from realism, there is still the
unaccounted-for intermediary of modernism in between. Scholars trying to
theorize Chinese postmodernism from Jameson's interpretation of Lu Xun
in "Third-World Literature in the Age of Multinational Capitalism,"
then, is not only theorizing the wrong period, but also skips over
another period entirely.

At this point, the "absent object" of China in Jameson's postmodernism
essay reads like an allegory for subsequent attempts to theorize Chinese
postmodernism. The risk that "Chinese postmodernism" becomes an empty
signifier detached from reality looms ever larger over this debate. It
would even be fine to say "postmodernity is not the condition of China,"
and leave the matter at that, had Arac not added a much more polemic
claim after his pessimistic pronouncement: "if not China, then not the
world" [@arac 144]. The mismatch of China and postmodernism, indeed, has
implications on Jameson's theoretical project as a whole: what does it
mean to theorize postmodernism as the "cultural dominant" of our current
historical era, if it does not exist in China?
