"We live on the Third World from the sun ..."
=============================================

China enjoys a peculiar status in Fredric Jameson's theory of
postmodernism. In order to appreciate this, it would be enough to
consider his curious analysis of Lu Xun's novella, "Diary of a Madman,"
in his notorious essay, "Third-World Literature in the Age of
Multinational Capitalism." Its central thesis is easy to summarize:
"Third-world texts, even those which are seemingly private and invested
with a properly libidinal dynamic---necessarily project a political
dimension in the form of national allegory."[@3W 69] It is worth
lingering on some canonical critiques of the essay, if only to examine
how they miss a broader and still more pressing paradox. Aijaz Ahmad's
famous rebuttal in "Jameson's Rhetoric of Otherness," for example,
proposes two distinct problems with Jameson's argument. The opening
section, true to Ahmad's title, discusses how Jameson's rhetoric
excludes, alienates or silences the voice of his "civilizational other,"
an argument often co-opted, by postcolonial theorists in particular, to
demonstrate the Eurocentrism of a white, privileged U.S. professor. The
rest of Ahmad's essay disputes the stability of Jameson's central terms:
"first-world" and "third-world" not only commit one to a certain
narrative of a post-war world order, but also strangely neglects the
"second world," or, in Ahmad's preferred terms, "the socialist
resistance."

But the rather awkward dialectical pairing of the first-world self
versus the third-world other is overlaid by a larger concern. The title
of Jameson's essay is, after all, not "Third-World Literature as
National Allegories," but "Third-World Literature in the Age of
Multinational Capitalism," which reminds one of a parallel formulation
of his, the definition of postmodernism as "the cultural logic of late
capitalism." "Late capitalism," one would remember, does not mean
"capitalism in its final stage" or "the end of history," but rather
means something like "advanced and thorough-going capitalism" or
"capitalism *of late*," from which Jameson is willing to extrapolate
"post-industrial society," "the era of globalization," "image society,"
and certainly "multinational capitalism." By focusing on "third-world
literature," then, Jameson not only means to break up the fixity of the
Euro-American literary canon, but also to supply an alternative to a
postmodernism presumed Western. If Western postmodernism is, in
Jameson's definition, the condition under which one's socio-historical
situation is no longer legible in the schizophrenic flux of fragmentary
images, then an alternative to this cultural logic might exhibit similar
features as its Western counterpart, but should nevertheless break
through the epistemological bind and make history visible once again. In
the final footnote of the essay, Jameson makes clear that this
breakthrough is none other than what he has elsewhere called "cognitive
mapping":

> What is here called 'national allegory' is clearly a form of just such
> mapping of the totality, so that the present essay---which sketches a
> theory of the cognitive aesthetics of third-world literature---forms
> pendant to the essay on postmodernism, which describes the logic of
> cultural imperialism of the first world and above all of United
> States.[@3W 88]

These are the expectations the essay establishes before the reader gets
to Jameson's literary examples, Lu Xun's "Diary of a Madman" and Ousmane
Sembène's *Xala*. An unsuspecting reader, unfamiliar with Chinese
literary history, will indeed find plenty of characteristics that mirror
Western postmodernism. The novella is an excerpt from the protagonist's
journal, where he details his paranoia that everyone around him,
including and especially his family members, are cannibals. Paranoia,
one would recognize, is one of the central features of, for example,
Thomas Pynchon's postmodern classic, *Gravity's Rainbow*, where this
pathological mechanism characterizes not only the psychic condition of
the novel's characters, but also the confused interpretive process of
seeking elusive connections between disconnected events and images. But
Lu Xun's paranoia works in the quite opposite direction, where
suspicions of cannibalism reconstructs, according to Jameson, "a grisly
and terrifying objective real world beneath the appearances of our own
world: an unveiling of deconcealment of the nightmarish reality of
things, a stripping away of our conventional illusions or
rationalizations about daily life and existence."[@3W 70] Rather than
representing the unrepresentability of one's social reality, then, the
schizophrenic text of the madman makes visible the real condition of
oppression and exploitation of the Chinese society. Similar conditions,
Jameson argues, also underwrites the texts of radical African writers
such as Sembène, who "find themselves back in the dilemma of Lu Xun,
bearing a passion for change and social regeneration which has not yet
found its agents."[@3W 81] *Xala*, particularly, produces "the space of
a past and future utopia---a social world of collective cooperation,"
against the political dilemma that confronts African nations after their
"nominal national independence."[@3W 81]

Both texts, in this sense, can be considered as alternatives to Western
postmo-dernism---until, that is, one looks at the publication dates:
Sembène's *Xala* was published in 1973, whereas Lu Xun's "Diary of a
Madman" first appeared in 1918. A time gap of more than half a century
is bizarre, to say the least, and especially disturbing when the readers
remember that they are supposed to be parallels, not just with each
other, but also with the likes of Nabokov and Pynchon. Lu Xun, indeed,
is just a bit older than Virginia Woolf, which might partly explain
Jameson's rather unexpected categorization, after explaining how the
madman's paranoia unveils "the nightmarish reality of things," of the
novella as modernist: "\[the unveiling\] is a process comparable, as a
literary effect, only to some of the processes of Western modernism, and
in particular of existentialism."[@3W 70] The suggestion is not an
implausible one: the concluding plea of the novella, "Save the
children...", resembles, as Jameson points out, "the archetypal deathbed
murmur of Kurtz, in Conrad's 'Heart of Darkness,' 'The horror! the
horror!'"[@3W 70] Lu Xun's penchance for constructing Kafkaesque,
absurdist allegories can also be seen in Jameson's use of Lu Xun's other
texts, most prominently in the allegory of the "iron house without
windows."[@3W 75] But to say that "Diary of a Madman" is modernism also
implies, given the essay's overall project, that the alternative to
Western postmodernism is modernism. This is already strange within the
essay, since earlier he explicitly claims that third-world texts are
"often unmodern."[@3W 66] For a cultural past to return to a present
whose material conditions have fundamentally shifted also seems to be
the kind of project that a Marxist would find least convincing. Jameson
himself, indeed, rejects it in his famous essay on postmodernism: "We
cannot, however, return to aesthetic practices elaborated on the basis
of historical situations and dilemmas which are no longer ours."[@PM 50]

An additional complication, however, comes from Lu Xun's position within
Chinese literary history. Jameson's method of literary periodization,
and in particular his preferred periodizing scheme of
realism---modernism---postmo-dernism, suggests that literature develops
in such a way that a new form both invokes its predecessors and negates
it at the same time. But "Diary of a Madman," again, was published in
1918, and one is confronted with the embarrassing fact that the novella,
purportedly modernist, has no established realist tradition to negate.
What is negated in the text is something else entirely, but
unfortunately rendered invisible by the English translation: the frame
narrative of the story---the entire first section---is written in
classical Chinese \[文言文\], a historical form of written Chinese,
whereas the rest of the journal entries are in vernacular Chinese
\[白话文\]. The transition between the frame narrative and the madman's
diary, then, represents the linguistic innovation introduced by the New
Cultural Movement, a wholesale rejection of the classical, elite
language form for a new one. Lu Xun's novella, further, is customarily
regarded as the first successful work of literature written in
vernacular Chinese. "Diary of a Madman" is therefore neither
postmodernist nor modernist, but the seminal work of a Chinese realist
tradition.

One now finds, within the "Third-World Literature" essay, three terms
that might serve as alternatives to Western postmodernism: national
allegory, cognitive mapping, and realism. It seems necessary to ask, if
not whether these terms are equivalent, at least how they are related to
each other. Yet realism is still the odd candidate of the three. If
Jameson is willing to grant Chinese realism as a postmodern alternative,
he also seems much more reluctant to do so in the African case: "One is
led to conclude that under these circumstances traditional realism is
less effective than the satiric fable: whence to my mind the greater
power of certain of Ousmane's narratives ... as over against Ngugi's
impressive but problematical *Petals of Blood*."[@3W 82] That realism is
less effective in postmodernity also has to do with the impossibility of
retrieving a cultural past: even if one were to revive realism today,
given the drastically different social context, such realism would have
to take on a different form. Jameson, indeed, tells us what this
different form is: "a model of a political culture appropriate to our
own situation will necessarily have to raise spatial issues as its
fundamental organizing concern. I will therefore provisionally define
the aesthetic of this new (and hypothetical) cultural form as an
aesthetic of *cognitive mapping*."[@PM 50-1] What Jameson wants to
preserve from Lu Xun's novella, then, is not so much realism as the
realist impulse, the attempt, in other words, to map out the
socio-historical condition in which the readers are otherwise incapable
of recognizing, which means, conversely, that neither realism can serve
as an alternative to postmodernism, nor "Diary of a Madman" an example
of such an alternative.

But equally puzzling is the "national" in "national allegory." Jameson
himself, to be clear, does not have much attachment to the status of the
nation. This focus comes from "recent conversations among third-world
intellectuals," where "there is now an obsessive return to the national
situation itself ... the collective attention to 'us' ... in short, to
the level of the 'people.'"[@3W 65] The two literary examples, indeed,
are reacting against dire moments of the nation's survival: for Lu Xun,
the presence of virtually every colonial power in early Republican
China; for Ousmane, "the crippling effects of what Fanon prophetically
warned them against---to receive independence is not the same as to take
it."[@3W 81] But even these descriptions call attention to the factors
that exist beyond a single nation, since colonialism implies at least
two: the colonizer and the colonized. The so-called "national"
allegories, then, are in fact transnational, and one is tempted to make
the counter-claim, following Jameson's earlier suggestion that
first-world readers already "read" third-world texts in certain
fragmentary forms, that third-world texts also already contain mirror
images of the first world. Jameson's attempt at proposing the "national
allegory," then, is on the same sliding scale as the one he diagnoses
"third-world texts" to be on, where "the telling of the individual story
cannot but ultimately involve the whole laborious telling of the
experience of the collectivity itself."[@3W 86] "The experience of the
collectivity" is, understood in the broadest sense as the grand
narrative of the entire human race, the loftiest goal that the project
of cognitive mapping can strive towards.

If, in the "Third-World Literature" essay, the central antagonism is
between postmodernism and cognitive mapping, between, that is, a
cultural logic that obscures one's socio-historical conditions and a
cultural intervention that unveils them, then it still seems rather
parochial to map these terms onto the geographical distinction between
the first and the third world. At times, as Ahmad points out, the
entirety of Western literature appears to be categorized as postmodern,
in the same sweeping gesture as when Jameson hypothesized that all
third-world literature tells the experience of the collectivity or
performs cognitive mapping. It is not terribly hard to find
counterexamples for both claims: in the "first world," cultural icons
such as Superman or Captain America function as the U.S. version of
national allegories, whereas in the "third world," even among Chinese
writers around Lu Xun's era, one can find individualizing and
psychologizing narratives from writers such as Eileen Chang and Xu
Zhimo. But the spatializing of the conceptual difference between
postmodernism and cognitive mapping is itself a curious gesture. It is,
as Jameson points out, an attempt to characterize the "radical
difference" in cultural formations between advanced capitalist countries
and the rest of the world. The ultimate failure of the "Third-World
Literature" essay to propose a convincing framework suggests, then, that
the "radical difference" still needs to be explored in a different way.

All this might come as a surprise: Jameson's version of postmodernism is
often glossed as the cultural logic that uniformly applies to everyone
and everywhere. Perry Anderson, a faithful scholar of Jameson's theory,
writes in *The Origins of Postmodernity*: "postmodernism, \[Jameson\]
concluded, was ... the cultural ether of a global system that overruled
all geographical divisions."[@anderson 74] We now know, judging from the
"Third-World Literature" essay, that Anderson gets it wrong: Jameson
does not think that postmodernism is global; the "Third World," whatever
that means, has an alternative to postmodernism, however that
alternative might look. In his foreword to Kojin Karatani's book,
*Origins of Modern Japanese Literature*, Jameson writes, regarding the
difference between Western and Japanese postmodernity, that "\[w\]e here
fleetingly glimpse an alternate world alongside our own historical one:
a world in which modernity in the current coinage did not occur, without
our being able to discern clearly the outlines of what, equally
supplanting precapitalist forms and relations, took its
place."[@jameson-mirror, xvii] An interpretation of Robert Stone's novel
explains how Western postmodern literature can be revitalized by
learning from non-Western countries: "I want to start with a
proposition, namely, that the culture of late capitalism is not merely
an empirically impoverished one, but one doomed structurally and
tendentially to enfeeblement, whence its desperate need to revitalize
itself with transfusions of the foreign and the exotic, the
Other."[@jameson-abroad 35] This "transfusion of the foreign and the
exotic" is perhaps also what Jameson is looking for when he visited
China for the first time in 1985, to give a lecture series on
postmodernism in Peking University. Occasionally, he even attributes the
formulation of his theory of postmodernism to that visit, as if to
confirm the revitalizing power of a cultural alternative.[^1]

But Anderson was also right. Jameson, in his other writings, makes the
exact opposite claim that postmodernism is now properly global. One
essay notes, for instance, how literary trends in non-Western countries
tend to replace the foreign import of postmodernism with domestic
productions of more or less the same thing---the import-substitution of
postmodernism, which means that first- and third-world literature look
increasingly alike: "\[E\]verywhere else (outside of Vermont), modern
and postmodern technologies are taken for granted, producing an odd
convergence effect between First World \[*sic*\] postmodernisms (in a
narrower aesthetic and formal sense) and the rich new production of a
whole range of Third World \[*sic*\] countries."[@jameson-import-sub
177-8] Writing for the first issue of the journal *Modern Chinese
Literature*, he argues that "\[a\] new culture which articulates the
logic of a new global and multinational late capitalism can no longer be
considered a purely Western export but may be expected to characterize
at least certain other local zones of reality around the capitalist
world."[@jameson-literary-innovation 76] But what is even more
surprising is his interpretation of Wang Wen-hsing, which concludes with
the claim, "it would now seem abundantly clear that his latest novel
must, in content as well as in style be considered
postmodernist."[@jameson-literary-innovation 75] This, then, is how
China makes Jameson's theory of postmodernism sound almost incoherent:
Jameson demonstrates that Chinese literature is postmodern, and argues,
simultaneously, that Chinese literature transcends its Western
counterparts, precisely because it is *not* postmodern.

[^1]: "My theories of postmodernism were first developed in China, when
    I taught for a semester at Peking University in 1985."
    [@jameson-singularity 103].
