\clearpage

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{palace}
\caption{Palace Hotel, Beijing}\label{fig:1}
\vspace{\baselineskip}
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{jianguo}
\caption{Jianguo Hotel, Beijing}\label{fig:2}
\end{figure}

"Nobody tells us what to do."
=============================

Is there a Chinese postmodernism? Really, all our previous speculations,
Western and theoretical, seem rather circumspect. If the question is
whether there was a postmodern culture in China, surely it would be
enough to go back and look. In the 1980s, the famous Chang'an Avenue in
Beijing, just in front of Tiananmen Square, which Jameson would have
seen, had recently broken free from national, centralized planning and
begun a wave of architectural experimentation.[See @shuishan] The new
cityscape was a dazzling mishmash of styles. Depending on the
spectator's perspective, the Beijing Palace Hotel, whose foundations
were laid in 1986, looks like it is either corroded from the top by its
traditional glazed roof tiles, or swallowed up from the bottom by its
steel-and-concrete body.[See @mingxian] But the construction boom was
happening everywhere in the country: where there had been a desolate
fishing village, so the legend of the city of Shenzhen tells, there now
emerged eight-lane highways, glistening skyscrapers, colossal cargo
container ports, Starbucks and McDonald's, etc. Televisions replaced
radios, and with them came late-century mass media---alongside TV
commercials from Boeing, Kodak and IBM,[See @schell] an animated TV
series called *Black Cat Detective* (1984), featuring a police cat
riding a motorcycle in the forest, stopping crime with his pistol.
Parents lamented the show's pervasive violence, claiming that it lacked
educational value, but such entertainment does educate the new
generation in previously unimagined ways. Those coming of age during the
market reform were, to be sure, not exactly like rolling stones, but
instead "eggs laid by the red flag,"[^1] the title of China's
rock-and-roll album in 1994. Revolutionary slogans, many of them
directly from Mao, appear not on walls and banners, but on campy
T-shirts, a new fashion trend among young students in the early 1990s,
if, that is, they did not prefer the more minimal versions, spelling out
to the world that "Life is a bore" or "I am pissed; leave me
alone."[@barme-red, 113] J. Hillis Miller, on one of his visits to
China, notes that "Chinese young people are not reading the Chinese
*Classics of Poetry*, or *The Dream of the Red Chamber*, or the works of
Lu Xun, any more than American young people spend as much time reading
Shakespeare, Jane Austen, or Toni Morrison."[@miller, 189-90] Here are
what they might be reading instead: a crime novel where the amnesiac
protagonist investigates a murder mystery that involves a lost lover,
alternative identities, faded photographs and shape shifting dream
sequences;[@WS] a metafiction where a character exchanges letters with
the author;[^2] a novel where one routinely finds that portions of the
narrative have been expunged and replaced by placeholder symbols;[^3] a
representation of the Cultural Revolution through the lenses of a
nihilist intellectual's sexcapade;[^4] and so on. Everywhere in China,
one finds unmistakable features of postmodernism: the depthlessness of
images, a weakening of historicity, pastiche, the overwhelming of the
old arts by the mass media, the collapse of the high and low, etc. Those
who summarily dismissed postmodernism as a Western import or
imposition[^5] quickly came to sound rather out of touch: of course
there was a postmodernism in China!

But the problem is not as easy as it looks. Scholars who examine the
same set of social phenomena and who arrive at this conclusion---that
China has had a postmodern culture---too often begin, strangely, by
itemizing stylistic features not of postmodernism, but of modernism
instead. The Beijing cityscape thus looks rather modern: blatant
imitations of the Manhattan or London skyline, triumphantly announced on
advertisement sheets, celebrate, first and foremost, not a mashup of
symbols, but the rapid-fire modernizations of the newest construction
technologies. Some, like the understated entrance to the Jianguo Hotel,
strive for an austere minimalism; most, like offices and government
buildings along the Chang'an Avenue, are either functionalist or in the
international style; all the while, media outlets are announcing that
China can now build skyscrapers taller than any other building in the
world.[^6] Possibly the most popular Chinese TV show, first broadcast in
1990, explores how the everyday life of Chinese individuals is disrupted
by the Cultural Revolution.[^7] Its title is most often translated as
*Yearning* \[渴望\], but slight modifications of that rendering are
enough to flush out its modernist themes: the term, in Chinese, lies
somewhere between "aspiration" (that is, for the project of market
reform and modernization), "desire," (or the liberation of sexual taboo
and individual romance from the purview of the state), [^8] and
"nostalgia" (a yearning for life before the revolution). There were,
among literary circles of the time, a "Chinese Kafka" and a "Chinese
Joyce."[^9] Cultural critics moved effortlessly from citing Jameson to
supplying, as evidence, the modernist crisis of subjectivity,[See
@kang-marxism] the role of the intellectual[See @fengzhen] and Freudian
melancholy at the onset of mass modernization;[See @xiaobing] they
identified irony instead of pastiche,[^10] neurosis instead of
psychosis,[^11] and experimental art and literature despite the death of
the avant-garde.[^12] Their justification for this was that Chinese
postmodernism looked different from Western postmodernism;[^13] what
they ended up arguing is that Chinese postmodernism was just like
Western modernism. Chinese modernism, the remaining term of the
combinatorics, thus loses much of its distinctiveness from Chinese
postmodernism, which allows Zhang Xudong, for example, to complete his
project on Chinese modernism and subsequently coedit a collection of
essays on Chinese postmodernism, both discussing essentially the same
era.[^14]

One could try to explain away the problem by arguing that, in Chinese
postmodernism, there was a powerful residual modernism that sometimes
overshadowed---and other times illuminated---the dominant cultural
field.[See @xiaobing-modernism] Modernism, according to this argument,
is the marginal practice against the cultural center of
postmodernism---except postmodernism, with its emphasis on difference
and discontinuity, is equally described as a marginal practice against
another cultural center, now defined as the official Party guidelines on
cultural production,[See @xiaobing-theory] and it is hard to see how
modernism can marginalize itself within a postmodernism that is
purportedly already marginalized. To argue that Chinese modernism was a
residual form in the 1980s and '90s, further, is to say very little
about the nebulous status of Chinese modernism itself: perhaps the
development of modernism was stunted and repressed by the Cultural
Revolution, so that it existed only in fleeting and fragmentary forms
before and after;[^15] but perhaps it did exist during the Cultural
Revolution after all, if one looks beneath the official discourse and
traces the lineage of underground poetry groups and political dissidents
from the 1930s till the Tiananmen massacre in 1989;[See
@xiaomei-modernism] if modernism remained underground, though, it would
have never entered into the public limelight, which makes aligning
modernism with any major cultural trend questionable; still, there was
the bizarre moment of "high culture" in the early 1980s, ushered in by
intellectual elites who all but surveyed every cultural innovation from
the West and made them available in China, among which was the
"innovation" of postmodernism itself.[^16] In order to appreciate the
belatedness of Chinese modernism, then, one first has to posit a
postmodernism---which is to say, to render modernism obsolete. But it
was not just modernism that appeared belatedly in the 1980s, since the
early years of Deng's market reform seemed to run through every major
Western intellectual movement at a blinding pace:[^17] in temporal
order, the revival of interest in Chinese classics and the renewed focus
on the individual subject is described as a cultural Renaissance;[^18]
discussions of modernization, economic liberalization, democracy and
human rights are sometimes grouped under the heading "Chinese
Enlightenment";[^19] the literary trend called "root-seeking literature"
\[寻根文学\] and its nostalgia for an untainted nature imitates,
sometimes self-consciously, European romanticism,[^20] even as the
decade's radically disillusioned or experimental contemporaries get
assigned to modernism. Perhaps this very embarrassment of periods can be
called postmodernism: the burst of creative energy after a decade of
suppression and at the beginning of Deng's reform was a hothouse for
cultural experiments, not for genuine innovations, exactly, at least not
when judged against the international literary scene, but for a whole
spectrum of previously established aesthetic styles, whose adaptation
and recombination in the Chinese context make for their own kind of
pastiche, here in the mood of playing catch-up.

Literary style, nevertheless, only tells us so much, especially if we
are taking our cues from Jameson. It would be helpful, for current
purposes, to distinguish between "postmodernism" and "postmodernity,"
which an older Jameson has regretted not doing:[^21] "postmodernism,"
like "modernism," is a period style or an aesthetic project, and
"postmodernity," like "modernity," is a historical period and a unique
stage of capitalist development---that of globalization, multinational
corporations, information society, etc. Nor are Chinese scholars solely
to blame for confusing the two---the confusion has its Western
counterparts.[See, e.g., @hutcheon] There are reasons for using the term
"postmodernism" to designate both the style and the period, since the
two are inextricably linked: one can only understand a historical period
through the formal features of representation available to them within
the period, and aesthetic forms can only be appreciated fully within
their historical context, through the particular social circumstances
from which they originate. A far more difficult task, though, is to
explain the specific ways that aesthetic forms relate to socio-economic
conditions, ergo not to use "postmodernity" and "postmodernism"
interchangeably, simply because they exist in close conjunction and
exhibit similar features. We have discussed how cultural critics tend to
analyze Chinese postmodernism in terms of stylistic parallels with
Western postmodernism, and sometimes with Western modernism. When the
focus is on the socio-economic period, though, one might reasonably
doubt whether China, as of 1983, had the necessary economic conditions
to sponsor a postmodernity: modernization was just getting underway; the
country was notably un-globalized; a liberalized market was taking
shape, but only in select "growth-pole" cities on the east coast;[See,
e.g., @jaros] large portions of the country were yet to be transformed
by Deng's economic policies and remained predominantly agrarian,
exhibiting residually socialist, and in some regions even feudal, modes
of production.[^22] China scholars sometimes refer to "postsocialism,"
dispensing with "postmodernity" and emphasizing China's unique
experience with socialism,[See, e.g., @dirlik-postsocialism] but it
usually reverts back to synonymy with postmodernism and so ends up
suffering from the same ambiguity.[^23] Some scholars, dispensing with
"postmodernity," believe that a more granular periodization is
necessary: we are, after all, talking about a country where foreign
investment was forbidden before 1979, where private enterprises only
began to develop in 1984, but which joined the WTO in 2001, hosted the
Olympics in 2008, and overtook Japan as the world's second biggest
economy in 2010. The 1980s and the 1990s, two different stages in Deng's
reform, look so different that 1979-89 is sometimes called the New Era,
and what comes after 1989 gets termed the Post-New Era.[See, e.g.,
@xudong-postsocialism] These terms, unfortunately, carry with them the
same conflation between cultural and economic periodizations.[^24] But
the economy was like the culture. If writers' dizzying experiments with
preexisting aesthetic forms dragged postmodernism into China, then
perhaps the drastic economic differences between regions, and the
recombination of anachronistic modes of production, might also have
allowed postmodernity to enter the mix.[^25] If one begins from the idea
that the world had already entered the era of postmodernity, then it is
enough to observe that China was part of the world, hence that it, too,
needed to confront postmodernity in its own terms.[^26] But then Chinese
economy was not uniformly postmodern (late capitalist, or globalized)
which means either that China, with its socialist heritage, has offered
a unique and radical alternative to global postmodernity,[^27] or that,
reiterating doctrines from the May Fourth Movement of 1919, it needed to
play catch up with the more developed capitalist countries and bring
about a wholesale postmodernity.[^28] This last possibility sounds like
a bad case of internalized developmentalism or Eurocentrism and is often
and appropriately critiqued for that reason.[^29] Seldom, though, does
one question the initial assumption, though questions are certainly
possible. In 1990, what could it have meant to say that postmodernity
was global, if China, for one, had not yet entered postmodernity?[^30]

This is the point where investigations of Chinese postmodernism come
full circle and rejoin their Western and meta-theoretical counterparts:
the term "postmodernism" is often rejected not because it does not apply
to China, but simply because it is a Western theoretical construct
purportedly designed to annihilate alternative, Third-World conceptual
models.[^31] We have seen two ways that "postmodernism," the style or
the period, might be called a Western import in China: either Chinese
culture, in a feverish campaign, adopted the aesthetic features of
Western postmodernism, or the Chinese economy, because of Deng's
reforms, was integrated into the economic postmodernity organized by the
developed, Western countries. But postmodernism is also a Western theory
and a critical perspective, which overzealous Chinese theorists might
have imposed onto an unsuspecting China, where neither postmodern
culture nor postmodern socioeconomic forms exist (or existed).[^32]
Postmodernism, in this sense, was an exercise in cultural
imperialism.[^33] But it has also been argued that postmodernism was
China's new nationalism,[^34] nativism[^35] and conservatism.[See, e.g.,
@zhao] This line of critique---that the problem with postmodernism lay
not in its Western origins, but in its being in some sense too
Chinese---was in part a reaction against the theorists who insisted that
a Chinese postmodernism would look different from the West's version,
and that it would serve as an economic or cultural alternative.[^36]
Then again, much like in Western scholarship, the term "postmodernism"
gets conflated with "poststructuralism," which implies a radical
transformation of Western intellectual thought---the Enlightenment,
liberalism, science and technology, etc.---since the dawn of modernity.
Because non-Western cultures, like China, have never adopted the
paradigms of Western-style modernity, either they cannot be "postmodern"
in the Western sense and therefore does not need postmodernism, or
perhaps they have been "postmodern" all along, since modernity is
uniquely Western, which makes "postmodernity" sound like "non-Western."
But the critique of Chinese postmodernism as nationalist conservatism
also originates from an under-argued equation of postmodernism to
postcolonialism, and perhaps more specifically from a widespread
misinterpretation of Kwame Anthony Appiah's essay, "Is the Post- in
Postmodernism the Post- in Postcolonial?".[^37] Even though, as Appiah
points out, "the *post*- in postcolonial, like the *post*- in
postmodern, is the *post*- of the space-clearing gesture,"[@appiah 348]
the post- in postmodernism was a space-clearing of prior aesthetic forms
and a construction of a new cultural dominant, whereas the post- in
postcolonialism was a radical self-refashioning of the marginalized
colonial subjects and their liberation from imperial powers. When
critics say that they reject postmodernism, then, what they sometimes
mean is that they reject postcolonialism: postcolonialism is sometimes a
"Western" theoretical imposition, and other times a nativist and
nationalist attempt to essentialize "the Chinese experience."[^38]

All these proposals of alternative terms and alternative definitions,
misunderstandings and overhasty disagreements, only serve to reproduce
the bewildering complexity of post-market-reform China itself, so that
the scholarly debates around Chinese postmodernism also look rather
postmodern, in their self-differentiating and self-contradicting ways. A
mapping of Chinese culture seems even more elusive, and further away
from Jameson's initial goal when proposing the term
"postmodernism"---that we understand the system qua system, and its
appearance to us in the form of a cultural dominant, through which we
might understand our place in history.

[^1]: The translation is tricky: the album title means "eggs laid by the
    red flag" or simply "eggs under the red flag," but "eggs" also
    means, in vulgar speech, "balls." Symbolically, then, either the
    revolutionary energy is lost in the new generation---eggs are
    fragile embryos---or the new generation inherits the virility
    ("balls") of the old---eggs are also, incidentally, bodies without
    organs.

[^2]: 莫言 \[Mo Yan\], 酒国 *\[The Republic of Wine\]* (1992).

[^3]: 贾平凹 \[Jia Pingwa\], 废都 *\[The Abandoned Capital\]* (1993).

[^4]: 王小波 \[Wang Xiaobo\], 黄金时代 *\[The Golden Era\]* (1994).

[^5]: See, e.g., [@jing-fever], where she calls postmodernism a
    "pseudo-proposition" and a product of China's inferiority complex in
    relation to the cultural innovations of the West.

[^6]: See, e.g., [@king-kusno]. Many scholars, King and Kusno included,
    argue that China's construction boom in the 1980s produces a mixture
    of modernist and postmodernist architecture, or, as they often style
    it in their essays, "(post)modernist" architecture. For an account
    of how the term postmodernism is introduced and misinterpreted among
    Chinese architects, see [@guanghui]. See also [@yaohua], where he
    outlines how architectural modernism fits into broader trends of
    Chinese cultural modernism, and how it looks like beyond Beijing.

[^7]: A brief account of the show's reception, and the history of
    Chinese TV dramas more generally, can be found in [@hongwei], and
    particularly 128-9.

[^8]: The analysis of desire is particularly widespread in feminist
    literary criticisms of Chinese literature in the 1980s. See, e.g.,
    Wendy Larson, "Woman and the Discourse of Desire in
    Postrevolutionary China: The Awkward Postmodernism of Chen Ran," in
    *Postmodernism & China*, pp. 337-57; [@castelli].

[^9]: 残雪 \[Can Xue\] and 王小波 \[Wang Xiaobo\].

[^10]: See [@xiaobin]. The title of the book captures the most common
    modernist themes assigned to Chinese postmodernism.

[^11]: See [@ning-western], particularly his comments on Can Xue and Xu
    Xiaobin on 910.

[^12]: See, other than Xiaobin Yang's *The Chinese Postmodern*,
    [@ning-reflection]. For examples of Chinese avant-garde literature
    and an argument against associating the avant-garde with
    postmodernism, see [@jing-anthology].

[^13]: "Third-World, non-Western nation-states toward the end of the
    century. In the Chinese case, it seems to me that the avant-garde is
    a distinct feature of Chinese postmodernism. Due to specific social
    and cultural conditions, twentieth-century Chinese art does not
    exactly follow the pattern of the succession of periods and styles
    in Western art such as modernism, avant-garde, and postmodernism."
    [@sheldon-lu].

[^14]: "What has been declared to be 'postmodern' is indeed meant to be
    a more completed, secured, and self-sufficient modernism than was
    achieved by those self-proclaimed, half-baked modernist ephemera of
    the early and mid-1980s." [@xudong-modernism 152]. In Dirlik and
    Zhang's *Postmodernism & China*, Zhang revised his periodization to
    align modernism with the New Era (1979-89) and postmodernism with
    the Post-New Era (1989-). A separate discussion on alternative
    periodizations of the reform era will follow.

[^15]: For a pre-revolutionary modernism, see [@laurence]; for a
    post-revolutionary modernism, see [@kang-avant-garde].

[^16]: For an account of how the discourse of postmodernism first
    entered China, see [@ning-mapping].

[^17]: This sequence is taken, in chapter order, from Jing Wang's *High
    Culture Fever: Politics, Aesthetics, and Ideology in Deng's China*,
    which does not explicitly make this argument.

[^18]: See Jing Wang, "High Culture Fever: The Cultural Discussion in
    the Mid-1980s and the Politics of Methodologies," in *High Culture
    Fever*, 37-117. See also [@zhao], and particularly when he quotes
    Gao Ruiquan on 39: "After Mao, a large number of students with higher
    grades poured into departments of literature, history and
    philosophy; many classics were reprinted and foreign classics
    translated. People were once again convinced of the value of
    knowledge, the significance of thinking, and that human beings
    should not be insulted. All these made China look like Europe in the
    time of the Renaissance."

[^19]: See Jing Wang, "*Heshang* and the Paradoxes of the Chinese
    Enlightenment," in *High Culture Fever*, 118-136.

[^20]: See Jing Wang, "Romancing the Subject: Utopian Moments in the
    Chinese Aesthetics of the 1980s," in *High Culture Fever*, 195-232.

[^21]: "Yet I soon became aware that the word I should have used was not
    postmodernism but rather postmodernity: for I had in mind not a
    style but a historical period, one in which all kinds of things,
    from economics to politics, from the arts to technology, from daily
    life to international relations, had changed for good."
    [@jameson-singularity 104].

[^22]: For an account of Deng's China, see [@vogel].

[^23]: "\[O\]ne may say that the cultural dominant in the post-New Era
    is then a postmodernity with 'Chinese characteristics,' a
    'post-socialist postmodernity.'" [@sheldon-lu 125]; "Where
    postsocialism designates the ambiguous place of Chinese society in
    the grand narrative of the modern that has never left us,
    postmodernism signifies an emerging vision of a form of life
    corresponding and bringing cultural affirmation to such economic
    reality."[@xudong-postsocialism 422].

[^24]: "Because the culture of the nineties is already completely
    different from the culture of the New Era (*xin shiqi*), we have
    begun to use the term post--New Era (*hou xin shiqi*) to deepen our
    analysis of the culture of the nineties," [@PM-zhang  325].

[^25]: "We would like to suggest, to the contrary, that it is precisely
    such a situation of spatial fracturing and temporal
    desynchronization that justifies the use of the postmodern against
    the spatial (as in the nation-form) and temporal (as in the
    development of a national market and culture) teleologies of
    modernity." [@PM-dirlik-zhang 3]; "The fact is that China is still a
    Third World \[*sic*\] country in which various elements are blended:
    premodern, modern, postmodern, and even primitive. In a society such
    as this, which is subject to contingencies and uneven development,
    anything can happen, at any time; so why not postmodernism?"
    [@ning-mapping 35].

[^26]: "Globalization in the 1990s is at one and the same time the
    *postmodernization* of the globe. There is no society in the world
    today that is completely untouched by transnational capital and
    postmodern culture." [@PM-lu 145].

[^27]: "A consideration of recent non-Western experiences thus allows us
    to make a modification of the unilinear Euro-American paradigm and
    envision alternative postmodernities." [@PM-lu  146]. For a cultural
    version of alternative postmodernism, see [@PM-liao].

[^28]: See, e.g., [@haomin]. Its title notwithstanding, the book
    extensively discusses China's economic background.

[^29]: See, e.g., Jing Wang, "The Pseudoproposition of 'Chinese
    Postmodernism': Ge Fei and the Experimentalist Showcase," in *High
    Culture Fever*, 233-260, where she argues that Chinese postmodernism
    is a symptom of the "Great Leap Forward" myth.

[^30]: Jonathan Arac, reporting from a conference on Chinese
    postmodernism, was among the few who did: "Assessing the situation
    as presented by these essays, and I have no competence to underwrite
    any claim to see beyond them, postmodernity is not the condition of
    China. It seems necessary to add: if not China, then not the world."
    [@arac 144].

[^31]: "This essay is not intended to argue for such an alternative
    \[for globalization\]. Rather, I try to offer an account of the
    current Chinese debate over an alternative modernity in order to
    problematize the very assumptions that animate the critical
    discourses on globalization." [@kang-globalization].

[^32]: "\[I\]ntellectuals are being pressured by the cultural status quo
    and the borrowed ideas of Western post-isms to turn their back on
    the modernist project, which has hardly won a foothold in the
    culture of their nations let alone been oppressively
    institutionalized." [@zhao  43].

[^33]: The problem is occasionally phrased in terms of orientalism
    versus occidentalism. What is not agreed upon is which aspect of
    orientalism the term occidentalism opposes---or whether they are
    opposed after all. See, e.g., [@xiaomei-occidentalism];
    [@ning-orientalism]. Jameson also writes, regarding Orientalism,
    that "\[i\]t does not matter much that the radical otherness of the
    culture in question is praised or valorized positively, as the
    preceding pages: the essential operation is that of differentiation,
    and once that has been accomplished, the mechanism Said denounces
    has been set in place ... I don't see how a first-world intellectual
    can avoid this operation without falling back into some general
    liberal and humanistic universalism." [@3W 77].

[^34]: For a critique of "nationalist postmodernism," see [@ben]. For an
    example of what he is critiquing, see [@xudong-nationalism].

[^35]: For a proponent of "nativist postmodernism," see [@longxi].

[^36]: For an overview of different arguments in the post-ism debates,
    see [@strafella].

[^37]: See, e.g., "Anthony Appiah asks whether the 'post' in
    postcolonialism is the same as the 'post' in postmodernism. The
    answer is clearly 'yes.'" [@PM-wang 114];
    "The fact that the three major schools of contemporary cultural
    studies \[postmodernism, postcolonialism, poststructuralism\] are
    all prefixed in the same way can hardly be a coincidence. Some
    scholars have pondered whether this post- is the same as that post-.
    The answer in all cases seems to be 'yes.'" [@zhao 32] For a more
    carefully argued case, see [@PM-liao]

[^38]: For an intervention that engages with both these points, see
    [@chow].
