"The people who taught us ..."
==============================

The previous pages document what happens when Jameson's theory of
postmodernism encounters a cultural context alien to its birthplace, how
a theoretical center, so to speak, encounters its margins and looks
dangerously close to breaking down. But one cannot shake the feeling
that, despite all this, one is moving further away from the source of
the conceptual confusion, that the most serious problems sit at the
center and not on the margin, problems that produce as their symptom
this frantic search for a coherent model of postmodernism. In other
words, Jameson's account of postmodernism should be considered secondary
to his overarching hermeneutics, which he outlined in *The Political
Unconscious* a few years before the postmodernism essay. A reformulated
theory of postmodernism could do worse than revisit the central
categories of Jameson's interpretive method, if only to retrace the
internal tensions that evolve later into full-blown antinomies.

It is easy to forget, further, that *The Political Unconscious* already
contains a miniature argument about postmodernism. One need not look
beyond the first page of the first chapter to find Jameson's critique of
"the tendency of much contemporary theory to rewrite selected texts from
the past in terms of its own aesthetic and, in particular, in terms of a
modernism (or more properly post-modernist) conception of language."[@PU
17] This tendency, whereby the historical past is continuously
transposed into the present, is contrasted with an antiquarianism
similarly disavowed by Jameson, "the modest claim ... that certain texts
have social and historical---sometimes even political---resonance."[@PU
17] Antiquarianism and the postmodern illusion of the eternal present,
according to Jameson, constitute the double bind of historicism, a
dilemma that is made no less visible by the famous but typically
misunderstood opening line of *The Political Unconscious*, "Always
historicize!," an oxymoron that means something like, "Ahistorically
historicize!" Jameson, indeed, is fully aware of this problem: insofar
as historic*ism* comes to us as a system of thought or method that can
be applied to all texts from all historical periods, it necessarily has
to be lifted out of history---hence it is, as Jameson calls it, the
"'transhistorical' imperative of all dialectical thought."[@PU 9] The
version of historicism that Jameson calls for, then, should not be
understood as the simple opposite of a pure ahistoricism, but rather as
its dialectical resolution. In *The Political Unconscious*, history is
not an objective reality but an always already subjectivized master
narrative of history: "\[Historical struggles\] can recover their
original urgency for us only if they are retold within the unity of a
single great collective story ... only if they are grasped as vital
episodes in a single vast unfinished plot."[@PU 19-20] This, then, marks
Jameson's departure from earlier versions of Marxist criticism, where
historical materialism is presented as a "science" that enjoys
unmediated access to "how things really are."[^1]

But it would also be mistaken to think, since history is bracketed in
*The Political Unconscious*, that it is no longer present in Jameson's
framework. This is where his focus on the reading subject rather than
the object---"that we never really confront a text immediately, in all
its freshness as a thing-in-itself"[@PU 9]---recruits the support of
psychoanalysis, through which texts that so often limit their
representation to the story of an individual or of a family can acquire
wider valence and be interpreted to represent the socio-political
condition that confronts all individuals and families alike. The
combination of a Lacanian psychoanalysis with Marxism makes available
the double meaning of history in Jameson's account: individual history
is also always collective History. The trauma that defines an
individual's psychic development constitutes, for Lacan, the
psychological register of the Real, and so does, for Jameson, the
History of class struggles[^2]: "history is *not* a text, not a
narrative, master or otherwise, but ... as an absent cause, it is
inaccessible to except in textual form, and that our approach to it and
to the Real itself necessarily passes through its prior textualization,
its narrativization in the political unconscious."[@PU 35] The twin
categories of historicism and History---of the textualization or
narrativization of history and history as the absent cause---can thus be
understood through the Lacanian registers of the Symbolic and the Real,
respectively. The political unconscious presumably gets its name from
Lacan's dicta that the unconscious is structured like a language, and
that the unconscious is the discourse of the Symbolic Order. The
function of the text, in these terms, is the half-broken arrow in
Lacan's Schema L pointing from the Symbolic to the Real, a narrative of
history that asymptotically approaches History itself, but that, by
definition, cannot reach it directly: "History is what hurts, it is what
refuses desire and sets inexorable limits to individual as well as
collective praxis ... This is indeed the ultimate sense in which History
as ground and untranscendable horizon needs no particular theoretical
justification."[^3]

\input{schema-l}

Schema L, furthermore, also discloses an additional axis or register,
namely, that of the Imaginary. The Imaginary is, for Lacan, the domain
in which daily interactions with others occur:[^4] how one "imagines"
one's identity, how one "imagines" the other person's identity, how one
"imagines" relations of kinship or rivalry, where moral or ideological
categories of good an evil becomes operative.[^5] The Imaginary axis
also maps out the positions of the ego (*a'*) and the other (*a*), the
latter of which, in the classical Oedipal paradigm, aligns with the
mother or the object cause of desire. A text can also function along the
Imaginary axis, performing, that is, what Freud calls daydreaming or
wish-fulfillment, whereby a reader projects their own desire onto the
representation of the text, and the narrative resolution affords a
sense---however fleeting or superficial---of closure. But there is the
alternative possibility that a text never fulfills the desire, and that
a desire involves a fundamental shift in both the constitution of the
psyche and the structure of one's society. Indeed, desire, in proper
psychoanalytic understanding, can never be fulfilled---it is, as Lacan
tells us, always the desire of the Symbolic Order, and the persistence
of the regulatory function of the Symbolic maintains the libidinal
economy of ongoing desire, which lands one back along the axis of the
Real and the Symbolic. It is in accordance with these two axes, then,
that Jameson differentiates between the Imaginary and the Symbolic text:
"Unlike the more degraded, and easily commodifiable, texts of the
Imaginary level, these new, second-level narratives---we will call them
... 'Symbolic texts' ... seeks to endow \[themselves\] with the utmost
representable density and to posit the most elaborate and systematic
difficulties and obstacles."[@PU 183] What this unfulfillable desire of
the Symbolic text encounters is none other than the Real itself, that
"bedrock against which the desiring subject knows the breakup of hope
and can finally measure everything that refuses its fulfillment."[@PU
184]

A direct connection between the narrative mapping of Lacanian registers
and Jameson's account of postmodernism is the universal condition of
schizophrenia: "a breakdown in the signifying chain, that is, the
interlocking syntagmatic series of signifiers which constitutes an
utterance or a meaning."[@PM 26] In psychoanalytic terms, this psychotic
breakdown happens when the person, in their childhood, does not
successfully undergo a mirror stage and is therefore stuck between the
infinite fluctuation between the ego and the other, between
identification and differentiation. The incomplete formation of the
psychotic subject, according to Schema L, also has to do with a missing
father figure, otherwise transformed into the Name-of-the-Father or the
Symbolic Order through the process of signifying substitution. When an
absent father cannot sufficiently mediate between the child and the
mother---when an underdeveloped Symbolic, in other words, cannot
regulate the relationship between the ego and the *objet petit a*---is
also when the individual collapses back onto the Imaginary axis, bound
by the shifting categories of self and other, good and evil, etc. The
psychotic collapse onto the Imaginary, further, illuminates another way
of understanding the cognitive bind of postmodernism, since "late
capitalism" in Jameson's formulation is alternatively called "image
society." The "image" here connotates the oversaturation of images
through the omnipresence of the media, but it also evokes the Imaginary,
as in the term "Imaginary text." The implication, then, is not only that
most of the cultural products in postmodernity serve as means of
wish-fulfillment, but also, since they are mass-reproduced as easily
accessible commodities, that they provide the immediate---albeit
"imaginary"---gratification of individual desires. It is a truism to say
that what Baudrillard calls the hyperreal blocks access to the Lacanian
Real, since the Real is by definition inaccessible. More importantly,
for Jameson, the hyperreal also blocks the regulatory function of the
Symbolic, thus rendering invisible its asymptotic approach to the
Real[^6] through the political unconscious. In postmodernity, in short,
all texts are Imaginary texts.

The result, then, is the experience of a subject irrevocably lost in the
Bonaventure Hotel, much like a child experiencing the world prior to the
mirror stage: "the liberation, in contemporary society, from the older
*anomie* of the centered subject may also mean not merely a liberation
from anxiety but a liberation from every kind of feeling as well, since
there is no longer a self present to do the feeling."[@PM 15] This last
explication of the crisis of the subject in postmodernity, finally,
marks the implicit disagreement between the methodologies of Jameson in
*The Political Unconscious* and of Deleuze and Guattari in
*Anti-Oedipus*. For Deleuze and Guattari, the path to the Real can only
be achieved through a mending of the split subject, a return, in other
words, to the Imaginary condition prior to the intervention of the
Name-of-the-Father. For Jameson, however, this politics of schizophrenia
also threatens to destroy the Imaginary axis, since, by the time one
reaches the mirror stage, the subject is already split, and to become a
pre-mirror-stage child is precisely to succumb to the condition of
postmodernism: "there is no longer a self present to do the feeling."
Jameson's preference for the Symbolic over the Imaginary text, then,
aligns with his attempt to reintroduce master narratives into a
postmodernism that forgets how to construct them, in the hopes that the
Real of History can be reintegrated into the postmodern psyche, not
through a psychotic break but through a revitalized mediatory force of
the Symbolic[^7], as the "return of the repressed": "the restoration of
the meaning of the greatest cultural monuments cannot be separated from
a passionate and partisan assessment of everything that is oppressive in
them and that knows complicity with privilege and class domination,
stained with the guilt not merely of culture in particular but of
History itself as a long nightmare."[@PU 299]

But *The Political Unconscious* does more than reinstate the Symbolic
against the infinite regress of the Imaginary. Its central thesis,
indeed, is a far more wide-ranging claim, namely, that all texts possess
a political unconscious, and that "the political perspective ... \[is\]
the absolute horizon of all reading and all interpretation."[@PU 17] His
four allegorical levels, each transcending its predecessor, demonstrate
Jameson's belief that the orientation towards the Symbolic---and,
through the Symbolic, towards the Real---is everywhere applicable: all
texts can be read, first, on a literal level, whereby one discovers "the
historical or textual referent"; second, on an allegorical level, where
a comparison with a different text (the Old Testament, for example,
against the New) reveals the "allegorical key or interpretive code" of
the original one; third, on a moral level, where one might trace the
journey of an individual subject, and where the more traditional version
of psychoanalysis, with its emphasis on the psychological development of
the individual, primarily operates;[^8] fourth, on an anagogical level,
where a properly political reading discloses the "collective 'meaning'
of history."[@PU 31] The transcendence of the levels comes from the
medieval Christian interpretation of the Bible, itself a grand narrative
of history that provides meaning for humanity's existence on earth. But
insofar as a movement through levels is not only possible but also seems
to always go from the textual to the anagogical, from the particular to
the universal, it would also seem that the distinction between the
Imaginary text and the Symbolic text is no longer stable, since what is
Imaginary about the text is merely the intermediary levels in a ladder
of interpretive transcendence, and seems to map onto the third, moral
level particularly well. An Imaginary text, according to the methodology
of *The Political Unconscious*, marks the deficiency in
interpretation---it is not so much that the text is Imaginary, as it is
one's interpretation of it. This also implies that the slogan, "Always
historicize!," can be rewritten in terms that directly oppose Jameson's
own argument that in postmodernity, all texts are Imaginary texts:
according to the argument in *The Political Unconscious*, all texts are
Symbolic texts.

This lengthy exposition arrives at a conclusion that many Lacanians
would consider self-evident: surely, all texts are Symbolic---the
ultimate Symbolic Order, for Lacan, is none other than language itself,
of which texts are instances. The incompatibility between *The Political
Unconscious* and *Postmodernism*, between the Symbolic and the Imaginary
axes in Schema L, only serves in turn to illuminate the peculiar status
of narratives in postmodernity: if postmodernism is missing the Symbolic
register, and if all texts are Symbolic, it should be surprising that
there are texts at all in postmodernity. One would notice, for example,
that Jameson does not include a chapter on narratives in his
*Postmodernism* book: the paradigmatic postmodern cultural forms are
"video," "architecture," "film," etc., and the chapter on Claude Simon
whose title should have been "Novel" bears instead the heading,
"Sentences." The argument, then, is that on the level of sentences,
postmodern literature generates the same effects of schizophrenia as do
other media: "In effect, the reader seems unable to conclude that
language has broken down (something which would leave her or him without
any subject position whatsoever), and therefore---as in a reverse shot
in film---constructs some new imaginary object to justify the
persistence of the subject position already achieved."[@PM 136-7] But
even in this chapter, where the point is to demonstrate the breakdown of
the signifying chain, Jameson seems unable to withhold himself from
enforcing a political interpretation and thereby providing a symptomatic
reading of the text: "it is also significant, if not symptomatic, that
the airplane does land, but at an intermediary stop somewhere ... *Les
Corps conducteurs* is, in that respect, one immense shaggy dog story
which leads us firmly toward the completion of an incomplete thing."[@PM
153] The stop that is always intermediary, according to this
interpretation, is the text's attempt to map out the experience of
postmodernity, perpetually caught between destinations. It would come
even more as a surprise that Jameson seems, at one point, to have
identified the Real in the novel: "Yet as Deleuze has taught us, even
under postmodernism we must distinguish between the body with organs and
the body without ... The body that has organs ... accompanies Simon's
sentences as their ghostly referent and as a stand-in for the Real
itself."[@PM 252]

Jameson's interpretation of Simon's novel, then, illuminates all the
anachronistic elements within *Conducting Bodies* that should not exist
against the backdrop of postmodernity. This is the problem with his
interpretation of Lu Xun all over again: there is, despite the universal
condition of schizophrenia, still a distinction between the body with
organs and the body without organs; the novel's valorization of closure,
according to Jameson, "marks Simon as relatively *traditional*;"\[@PM
153; emphasis added\] an earlier argument points out, first, that
"Simon's relationship to such raw materials can in any case be said to
be more *realistic*," and second, that Simon has a "*modernist* and
painterly relationship to the visual."\[@PM 153; emphasis added\] The
reappearance of the Real is also described with a temporal metaphor, as
the "ghostly referent" of the postmodern sentences, a thing of the past
that has come back to haunt the present. But the most glaring
anachronism is none other than the narrative itself, which, once
transformed by Jameson's own hermeneutics into a Symbolic text, becomes
the force field in which all forgotten possibilities of the past begin
to dismantle the immaculate surface of the postmodern and emerge
revitalized.

At this point, Jameson's interpretation of Simon reads like a chapter of
*The Political Unconscious* that has wandered astray into
*Postmodernism*. The fact that Simon's novel no longer looks like a
synchronic construct but rather a combination of diachronic elements, in
turn, illuminates a perhaps surprising feature of Jameson's
hermeneutics: for all his suggestion of reintroducing the Symbolic
register, he is not in fact interested in reducing all texts into one
single, homogeneous master code. Insofar as the Symbolic Order is a
system in Lacanian terms, it makes visible all the heterogeneous
components that resist the imposition of the system in the first place.
By regulating one's Imaginary experience, it discloses a whole host of
conflicts and antinomies that persist unresolved. Jameson's reading of
Simon does something similar: by naming the synchronic system through
which all disparate cultural influences must make way---that is, by
periodizing *Conducting Bodies* as a postmodern novel---the
non-synchronous, pre-postmodern features of the novel emerges with
striking clarity: "traditional ... realistic ... modernist." The
"Sentence" chapter in *Postmodernism* is therefore not a mistake on
Jameson's part, but rather wholly in line with his interpretive
methodology outlined in *The Political Unconscious*: an interpretation
becomes "productive at the moment when the narrative text in one way or
another *deviates* from its basic schema; far less so, in those
instances where, the narrative proving to be its simple replication, the
analyst is reduced to noting the conformity of the manifest text to the
underlying theoretical schema."[@PU 126] The notion of a text always
"deviating" from its schema aligns with a similarly underappreciated
aspect of Jameson's method of periodization, namely, that a historical
period is never as clean and settled as its reductive conception makes
it out to be, since within any given period, one can still observe the
residual features of the previous period and the emergent ones of the
next, a phenomenon that Ernst Bloch calls the "synchronicity of the
non-synchronous." Jameson's innovation over Bloch's term is to establish
a parallel between what, in Marxist tradition, one might call the
socio-economic condition of uneven development and what one can now call
the condition of uneven development within the realm of culture.
Cultural uneven development, then, has three primary functions: 1) each
historical condition has its particular way of being represented; 2)
these representational features, as historical conditions disappear or
reemerge, are recombined in what looks like a coherent representation
appropriate for the latest period; 3) by tracing how these uneven formal
features index historical conditions and struggle to resolve historical
conflicts within a new cultural form, one might break apart the latter's
reified surface and, identifying the emergent social trends, project a
utopian vision for the future. The most apparent way of encoding these
formal features is through the category of genres, and Jameson argues
that the ultimate horizon of genre analysis is the exploration of their
unevenness: "genre theory must always in one way or another project a
model of the coexistence of tension between several generic modes or
strands."[@PU 141] Cultural uneven development, as outlined in *The
Political Unconscious*, also shows one the way out of postmodernism: the
lost sense of history might be redeemed, first, by naming postmodernity
as a synchronic system, and then by identifying the diachronic elements
within its cultural products, which demonstrates that the postmodern
"eternal present" is a mere illusion, and that history or its
possibilities are, after all, not entirely lost.

Jameson's adaptation of uneven development for cultural criticism is,
further, parallel with the evolution of the concept within Marxist
theory more generally. The term, as it was first coined by Trotsky, is a
precondition to his political project of permanent revolution, which
does not mean "a revolution that never ends," but "a socialist
revolution that can happen at any time": different modes of
production---from feudalism to capitalism to socialism---need not
transpire in absolutely uniform stages everywhere in the world. A
country whose overall social structure is by certain standards
"backwards" might borrow selectively from the most advanced economies;
in some places, at least, it will play host to the world's most advanced
technologies and organizational forms, which exist in close conjunctions
with seemingly archaic practices. In the colonies, and on other
peripheries, the economy is hybrid---"combined and uneven." It follows
that in underdeveloped countries such as Russia, a socialist revolution
is not only possible, but more likely to succeed in overturning both the
feudal residues and the capitalist emergent---hence Lenin's famous adage
that any chain is only as strong as its weakest link. For Trotsky, then,
uneven development is the privileged revolutionary condition of the
marginal countries in the global capitalist system. Later usages of the
term, however, no longer restrict it in the periphery and make it
applicable for social formations everywhere and at all scales.[^9] Not
only the disadvantaged countries suffering from imperial domination or
capitalist exploitation can be described as unevenly developed. Instead,
uneven development is among the internal logics of capital itself:
capitalism, because of its periodic fluctuations in supply and demand,
creates immense amounts of surplus value in more developed geographic
regions, which then need to be reinvested in less developed regions to
avert crisis. The less developed regions, gaining the influx of capital
and therefore more advanced infrastructure, higher-educated labor and
more technologically advanced products, can seem to be accelerating its
development to draw "even" with the more developed regions. However, to
draw even and become developed also creates similar geographic
differentiations, reproducing unevenness elsewhere or with increasing
intensity.[^10] The theory of economic uneven development, then, has
three primary functions: 1) it illuminates the geographical
specificities of socio-economic formations, not only at the level of
nation states---as in Trotsky's original conception---but also
internally among regions and provinces, within cities and countrysides,
etc.; [^11] 2) it provides an explanatory mechanism, through the
intrinsic logic of capital, for how these disparities coexist and
recombine; 3) because unevenness is arguably everywhere, capitalism as a
dominant system can also be dismantled everywhere---the chain, in other
words, is made entirely of weak links. When one compares this economic
conception of uneven development to Jameson's cultural version, one
would notice, other than their manifest parallel, that the temporal
unevenness of historical periods is spatialized---or mapped
onto---geographical unevenness. This, on the one hand, coheres with
Jameson's project of cognitive mapping: no one enjoys unmediated access
to history itself; history becomes visible, instead, through the
inconsistencies and interplays of generic forms within a particular
text, as if the text were a house consisting of closed and ossified
rooms, miraculously preserved through the ages, and an interpretation is
a tour, not only of the individual rooms themselves, but also of how
they function together in ostensible coherence, tracing, that is, the
seams in the carpet and the cracks on the walls. On the other hand,
uneven development is a spatial category, which would make it seem
particularly amenable in an era where temporal thinking has all but
disappeared: in postmodernity, "our daily life, our psychic experience,
our cultural languages, are today dominated by categories of space
rather than by categories of time."[@PM 16]

Jameson, in sum, asks one to read for unevenness---it is central to his
method. It must come as a surprise, then, that Jameson, in the final
section of *Postmodernism*, seems to foreclose the possibility of any
unevenness in postmodernity. After attributing Bloch's "synchronicity of
the non-synchronous" to modernism, Jameson writes:

> \[T\]he postmodern must be characterized as a situation in which the
> survival, the residue, the holdover, the archaic, has finally been
> swept away without a trace. In the postmodern, then, the past itself
> has disappeared (along with the well-known "sense of the past" or
> historicity and collective memory) ... Ours is a more homogeneously
> modernized condition; we no longer are encumbered with the
> embarrassment of non-simultaneities and nonsynchronicities. Everything
> has reached the same hour on the great clock of development or
> rationalization (at least from the perspective of the "West"). This is
> the sense in which we can affirm, either that modernism is
> characterized by a situation of incomplete modernization, or that
> Postmodernism is more modern than modernism itself.[@PM 309-10]

But one already knows that, by Jameson's own admission, these claims
cannot be true. Intuitively, if uneven development characterizes the
radically different levels of modernization during modernity, it would
be rather odd if it did not characterize the radically different levels
of globalization during postmodernity. The revival of older narrative
forms in postmodernism means that "the holdover" has precisely not been
"swept away without a trace," and the example of Claude Simon
demonstrates "the embarrassment of non-simultaneities and
nonsynchronicities" within postmodern culture. Not everything has
reached "the same hour on the great clock on development," since any
Jamesonian literary period has always been the site where heterogeneous
attributes from different historical periods are unevenly combined.
Perhaps more importantly, if there is no unevenness in postmodernity,
there is also no way out of postmodernity, and the lack of struggles or
contradictions would mean that any transcendence would be impossible. If
this one paragraph of Jameson's were correct, it would mean that the
dialectic had stalled. If one is looking for the possibility of
revolution, then, the parentheses around "at least from the perspective
of the 'West'" would be curious, and recall Jameson's inconsistent
attempts at finding alternatives to postmodernity outside the "West" in
"third-world countries." But if unevenness is nonexistent in developed
countries of the global capitalist center, and preserved in the
developing countries of the margins, then Jameson seems to be bracketing
contemporary innovations on the theory of uneven development and
reverting to Trotsky's initial, much more limited formulation, namely,
that only the underdeveloped countries enjoy their development uneven
and combined. All these are at odds with what Jameson does throughout
his career anyway: interpreting cultural texts, as he does in *The
Political Unconscious*, in terms of uneven development, and this at a
stage in history when uneven development is ostensibly impossible.

It is now worth returning to the Lacanian schema one last time and
observe that uneven development has its parallel in the human psyche as
well: the definition of the postmodern condition as psychosis means that
postmodernity has an underdeveloped register of the Symbolic. But
History as the Real, according to Jameson, is made visible through
uneven development as a reading method, which means that the theory of
uneven development---as a unified system that explains and generates
difference---can itself be considered the Symbolic Order. It is in this
sense that Jameson's rejection of uneven development in postmodernity
can be called an act of foreclosure: it refuses the intervention of the
Symbolic Order, thus making uneven development reappear in the Real and
resurface, in the political unconscious of cultural texts, as the
"return of the repressed." Jameson's ultimate mistake in "Third-World
Literature" and elsewhere is to look for an alternative to Western
postmodernism in his civilizational other---whereas his own method, all
along, has been instructing him to look for the Other instead.

Here, then, is why one should study the culture of post-market-reform
China: Jameson, in addition to instructing all cultural critics to read
for unevenness, also claims that postmodernism is the culture of
societies *without* unevenness; meanwhile, something that looks very
much like postmodernism has manifested existed in China, and under
conditions of well-nigh classical unevenness. So what is this thing that
Jameson argues cannot exist, this uneven postmodernism, in a nation for
which capitalism is at once belated and inconceivably new?

[^1]: See [@althusser-ideology], in particular his distinction between
    various ideologies and the "science" of historical materialism. Also
    see [@lacan-subject 194-5]: "\[O\]ne can say that a part of the
    reversal of Hegel that \[Marx\] carries out is constituted by the
    return (which is a materialist return, precisely insofar as it gives
    it figure and body) of the question of truth ... Symptoms remained
    somewhat vague when they were understood as representing some
    irruption of truth. In fact they *are* truth, being made of the same
    wood from which truth is made, if we posit materialistically that
    truth is what is instated on the basis of the signifying chain."

[^2]: "Nonetheless, it is not terribly difficult to say what is meant by
    the Real in Lacan. It is simply History itself: and if for
    psychoanalysis the history in question here is obviously enough the
    history of the subject, the resonance of the word suggests that a
    confrontation between this particular materialism and the historical
    materialism of Marx can no longer be postponed." [@IS 384].

[^3]: [@PU 102]. Whether Jameson has a system of ontology in
    mind---whether History as the ground can be called
    "materialist"---is an investigation for another day. This
    interpretation of Jameson, at any rate, differs slightly from
    [@galloway]. For Galloway, the claim "there *is* an absolute
    horizon" demonstrates that Jameson subscribes to an ontology of
    material conditions. But History *really* exists for Jameson in the
    sense that History is the Real, a psychological register that is at
    once subjective and outside of the purview of the subject. One might
    preliminarily say, reading Jameson with Lacan, that Jameson's
    relationship to an ontological system is dialectical---which,
    regarding two faithful Hegelian scholars, says nothing very
    surprising at all.

[^4]: "Indeed, for imagos---whose veiled faces we analysts see emerge in
    our daily experience and in the penumbra of symbolic
    effectiveness---the specular image seems to be the threshold of the
    visible world." [@lacan-mirror 77].

[^5]: "\[I\]t will be appropriate to designate this primordial rivalry
    of the mirror stage as a relationship of otherness: nowhere better
    can we observe the violent situational content of those judgements
    of good and evil which will later on cool off and sediment into the
    various systems of ethics." [@IS 357].

[^6]: "By taking one's bearings from the joint between the consequences
    of language and the desire for knowledge---a joint that the subject
    is---perhaps the paths will become more passable regarding what has
    always been known about the distance that separates the subject from
    his existence as a sexed being, not to mention as a living being ...
    Similarly, a certain order of construction can be required regarding
    what must be attained by way of what fundamentally screens the real
    in the unconscious fantasy." [@lacan-subject 195].

[^7]: "Only by grasping images---and also the surviving fragments of
    authentic myth and delusion---in this way, as that trace of the
    Imaginary, of sheer private or physiological experience, which has
    undergone the sea-change of the Symbolic, can criticism of this kind
    recover a vital and hermeneutic relationship to the literary text."
    [@IS 376].

[^8]: One might be concerned as to why, in my argument, Lacanian
    psychoanalysis is elevated above any specific level within Jameson's
    four allegorical levels. This is because the incorporation of a
    structuralist Symbolic in the Lacanian framework allows Jameson to
    detach it from the otherwise individualizing and psychologizing
    tendencies of psychoanalysis and provide it with a universal
    significance: "I must omit the familial or more orthodox
    psychoanalytic background to this situation, which Lacan transcodes
    into language by describing the Oedipal rivalry in terms not so much
    of the biological individual who is your rival for the mother's
    attention but rather of what he calls the Name-of-the-Father,
    paternal authority now considered as a linguistic function." [@PM
    26].

[^9]: For possible influences on Jameson's usage of uneven development,
    see "Contradiction and Overdetermination" and "On the Materialist
    Dialectic," in [@althusser-marx]. Regarding uneven development in
    postmodernity, see [@harvey-postmodernity], or [@mandel], in
    particular his chapter on "The Structure of the Capitalist World
    Market."

[^10]: For a discussion of uneven development as an internal mechanism
    to avert crisis in capitalism, see [@harvey-capital].

[^11]: "Today, however, any theory of uneven development has no such
    luxury and has to cover not only national scale political economies
    but processes of economic restructuring, political movements and
    cultural revolts at sub-national scales---the urban, the regional,
    and (as feminism has surely taught us by now) the scale of the
    household---and simultaneously the international scale." [@smith
    187-8].
