"Run in front of your shadow."
==============================

*Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon*[@lee], for its Western audience, is a
recognizably postmodern film. The genre of martial arts, once evoking
the slapstick humor of Charlie Chaplin or Buster Keaton, is now
beautifully refashioned in the style of arthouse cinema, collapsing high
and low cultures. The plot is no longer haphazardly thrown together,
only to give halfhearted transitions between spectacles of physical
violence; rather, fight scenes seem deliberately delayed, spaced apart,
and ease in and out of a slow and smooth-flowing narrative, developing
characters and reinforcing themes: Jen, the rebellious daughter of
Qing-dynasty aristocrats, defies gravity and takes off flying above the
cloisters of imperial Beijing, whereas the dutiful and more
traditionally-minded Yu Shu Lien, in pursuit of Jen, persistently drags
her to the ground. The laws of physics are overruled by elegantly
choreographed acrobatics and special effects: *The Matrix*[@wachowski]
has Neo dodging bullets; *Crouching Tiger* has Yu Shu Lien catching
arrows. Jen's love interest, Dark Cloud Lo, is the leader of a gangster
group from Xinjiang, but the English subtitles sometimes gloss his
hometown as "the West," as in "the frontier." The romantic backstory
between Jen and Lo thus feels like an inserted sequence from a Hollywood
Western: the prized daughter of city-dwellers, wandering in an uncharted
desert, falls in love with a rogue cowboy on horseback. The Taklamakan
Desert, where the sequence is shot, looks rather like Tatooine from
*Star Wars*[@lucas]. The fluctuating camaraderie and betrayal between
Jen and her evil mentor, Jade Fox, reminds one of the relationship
between a Sith Lord and his apprentice, and the scene where the kung fu
master Li Mu Bai blocks the poisonous needles with his sword resembles a
Jedi knight deflecting blaster bolts with a lightsaber.[^1] Jen's
yearning for freedom, finally, makes her disillusioned with Li Mu Bai,
her would-be mentor, or Yu Shu Lien, her sworn older sister, or Dark
Cloud Lo. Her final leap off the cliff of Wudang, drifting ambiguously
upwards through the clouds, perhaps symbolizes her mystical abandon, but
also recalls the ending of Ridley Scott's *Thelma and Louise*[@scott],
whose heroines drive off the cliff but remain suspended in midair in a
final freeze frame. *Crouching Tiger*, then, is a postmodern mashup in
the most recognizable ways.

But *Crouching Tiger* is also a national allegory, just by virtue of
being a Chinese-language kung fu movie. We only have to retrace the
cultural lineage of martial arts to understand this point: if a
character's journey---first studying kung fu as an initiate, then
overcoming all obstacles before finally becoming a self-sufficient
master---is the construction of an individual identity, the journey of
the genre itself, migrating from Hong Kong to Hollywood with the Chinese
diaspora, has helped construct a national identity. The link between
martial arts and Chinese nationalism was established around 1900, when
an anti-imperialist, anti-foreign and anti-Christian movement called the
Boxer Rebellion sought to drive out the Western colonizers with "Chinese
boxing," or kung fu. The symbol has been gendered from the start:
stereotypically feminine and enfeebled Asian men are revitalized by
ancient Chinese practices and defeat the phallic power of Western rifles
and cannons and so emerge re-masculinized. To make a martial arts film,
then, is to tell a story about China and Chinese manhood: We see
hypermasculine Bruce Lee defeating one white man after another, or
Jackie Chan's underdogs fighting repeatedly from their marginalized
positions to the top. In *Crouching Tiger*, we see characters from all
over the country coming together in the capital city of Beijing: Lo is
from Xinjiang, China's westernmost province; Jen declares herself
Manchurian, the ruling ethnicity of the Qing Dynasty, who came from the
northern borderlands; Yu Shu Lien has a recognizably southern last name.
The cast, moreover, covers an even greater geographical range: Chang
Chen is from Taiwan; Chow Yun-fat and Cheng Pei-pei are from Hong Kong;
Michelle Yeoh is from Malaysia; Zhang Ziyi is from Chinese mainland. The
"China" in Ang Lee's national allegory, in short, is the Chinese
diaspora, called back home by Columbia Pictures and the PRC.

The film, in this sense, is doing something distinctive: it calls
postmodernism to mind, but performs its postmodern operations on
cultural contents that are distinctly Chinese---in this case, the genre
of martial arts, which carries with it the ideology of a
well-established national allegory. What, then, is the fate of national
allegory in postmodernism? For one thing, China feels rather uncanny in
*Crouching Tiger*: not many of its diverse cast are native Mandarin
speakers, and however much their accents construct, for the present, a
polyphonic image of the diaspora-in-unity, they also displace this
period drama from the Qing Dynasty into some unfamiliar moment in a
parallel history, eerily similar to our globalized present. This is
perhaps part of the reason that the film's mainland audience have found
it alienating and "inauthentic." But it is also not entirely clear what
role martial arts is playing in this imaginary, pseudo-historical China,
especially since everyone in the film seems eager to abandon it. The
movie takes as its heroes a swordsman and a she-warrior, but their
martial exploits are staged as digressions to a romance plot that the
movie wants to make central: He cannot complete the final stage of his
meditation because of his lingering romantic feelings towards her; his
marriage proposal is further foiled when he encounters the murderer of
his mentor, a blood feud that results, finally, in his death and an
unconsummated love affair. Martial arts, further, is a structure of
social morality that obstructs individual freedom. At one point, Jen,
lamenting her arranged marriage, imagines an escape in the martial arts
realm: "I wish I were like the heroes in the books I read. Like you \[Yu
Shu Lien\] and Li Mu Bai. I guess I am happy to be marrying. But to be
free to live my own life, to choose whom I love ... That is true
happiness." But Yu, repressing at this point her love for Li, dispenses
with the illusion the martial arts books offer: "Fighters have rules
too: friendship, trust, integrity ... Without rules, we wouldn't survive
long." The source text of these martial arts books, indeed, is the
Chinese classical novel *Water Margins*, which tells the story of a gang
of outlaws, living in the martial arts realm beyond the purview of the
imperial government, but who, in the end, eventually accept amnesty from
the emperor and offer military service. *Crouching Tiger*, then, begins
where a classical martial arts story ends: Li Mu Bai gives up his sword
to a government official, symbolically terminating his wanderings at the
margins of the society. It is in this sense that the film is also
post-martial-arts: what happens when the knight errant becomes the
master, when kung fu is a stricture rather than an emancipation, when
there are no more rogue adventures to tell?

It would be insufficient, however, to say that kung fu in Ang Lee's film
becomes mere background for a psychological drama and thereby loses its
political valence. English-speaking commentators are in the habit of
shortening the title to its first two words. Salman Rushdie, at one
point, wrote a celebratory op-ed on *New York Times*, "Can Hollywood See
the Tiger?" But the tiger is only crouching; the dragon is hidden.[^2]
Dragon, indeed, comes to the West part and parcel with martial arts as
the cultural symbol of China, partially hidden under anglicized names:
Bruce Lee's Chinese name means, literally, "little dragon,"[^3] and
Jackie Chan's means "becoming dragon." This is also how *Crouching
Tiger* hides its dragon: the female protagonist is assigned the name
"Jen" only in the English subtitles. Her Chinese name is "Yu Jiaolong,"
which, had the Mandarin-speaking audience not seen the ideograms, has
two possible meanings with the same pronunciation: 蛟龙, literally,
"scaly dragon," or 娇龙, "delicate dragon." Jen, and therefore China, is
both masculine and feminine. One would remember that her adventure
begins when she steals the male hero's sword, a phallus that seems
particularly good at slicing every weapon it encounters in half. The
legendary sword, in other words, is the ultimate phallus in its ability
to castrate all other phalluses. Hence the dynamic among Jen, Li and Yu
becomes the female version of an Oedipal complex: Li, the Symbolic
Father and the original wielder of the phallus, insists on teaching Jen
the doctrines of martial arts; Yu and Jen's antagonism over the sword is
thus a rivalry over the possession of the phallus, as Yu, watching Jen
caressing the sword in the midst of their duel, cries out, "Don't touch
it! That's Li Mu Bai's sword ... Without the Green Destiny, you are
nothing." The arrangement of this family also makes Jen the progeny of
two older-generation warriors, the new China that is to inherit the
cultural legacy of martial arts. What we learn, then, is that the
transmission of this lineage has gone awry: Li and Yu cannot consummate
their marriage, and do not have their own child; Jen refuses to become
Li's student, and even when she ends up in Wudang Mountain, the sacred
site of martial arts, she does not enter training and commits suicide
instead. In a post-martial-arts story, there will be no more martial
arts.

The image of China, then, becomes indeterminate. We have overlooked the
fact that, despite the Oedipal tensions among the film's three
protagonists, Yu agrees to be Jen's older sister, not Jen's mother. What
would otherwise be the rebellion of a child against her parent, in the
postmodern iteration, is transposed onto a sibling rivalry along the
Imaginary axis. The rapturous tangle of the bamboo forest where Jen and
Li fought resembles, in Deleuzian terms, a rhizome, and only Li can
balance atop its crisscrossing lines, as the Symbolic Order that
commands and regulates its schizophrenic fluctuations. But the Symbolic
tends towards its self-destruction. Jade Fox, both the character and the
actress, belongs to the same, earlier generation of martial arts
warriors as Li Mu Bai. Their phallic powers cause their mutual demise:
Li penetrates Jade Fox with his legendary sword, but Jade Fox also
poisons him with her needle---not only a penetration, but also an
insemination. Jen, or the China of our contemporary, can only tumble
through the bamboo rhizome. At most, she can become a line of flight,
fleeing into the river or falling through the Wudang clouds, suspended
between life and death, liberation and annihilation. Her double gender,
though, affords her one more comment on the state of the national
allegory in postmodernism. Poisoned by her mentor, drenched and holding
the stolen sword aloft, Jen asks the approaching Li Mu Bai, "Do you want
the sword or me?" The question, further, is addressed to the global
audience: is it the phallic, hypermasculine version of China that they
want, or is it the feminine, Oriental and hypereroticized version? The
film, then, anticipates both the triumphant celebration that the dragon
of China returns to Hollywood with martial arts, and the equally
scathing allegations of self-Orientalism, reproducing an alluring image
of China just as Westerners had imagined it. Neither response escapes
the imbalanced power dynamic: however China is represented, it is for
the global metropolis to consume, and the gender reversals no longer
hold emancipatory potentials once they are ossified into a postmodern
commodity.

To consider *Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon* as an instance of Chinese
postmodernism, then, is to consider Chinese postmodernism, not as the
self-same Western cultural dominant, but as the same set of formal
operations that can take as its content Chinese-specific genres. What we
get, other than an expanded list of Chinese cultural products that can
be considered postmodern, is an understanding of how these local genres
manifest themselves within the postmodern force field, how the
ideologies that the genres carry restructure themselves or wobble and
break down. But in doing so, we have only confirmed, rather
anticlimactically, what Jameson outlines in his essay on the
import-substitution of third-world culture: previously indigenous genres
specific to the third world, he argues, tend to converge with global
trends of postmodernism. This is perhaps a frustrating conclusion, no
less because it is drawn from a film that was, among Chinese viewers,
well-received only in the economically advanced regions where Hollywood
has tended to dominate anyway---Taiwan and Singapore. In a sense, taking
indigenous genres as its content and transforming them---abstracting and
ironizing them---is precisely what Western postmodernism does. Does this
mean, therefore, that postmodernism with Chinese-specific content is the
same postmodernism after all?

The author of *Playing for Thrills*, however, hates the genre of martial
arts with a passion. First published in 中国青年报 *\[China Youth
Daily\]* in 1999, one of Wang Shuo's best known essays criticizes the
bestselling martial arts author 金庸 \[Jin Yong\].[^4] At one point, he
tries reluctantly to read one of Jin Yong's volumes, after repeated
urgings from enthusiastic friends, but claims it was "an awful
experience": "The plot was repetitive, the style longwinded; characters
start fighting anytime they see each other, and can't seem to talk
through problems that can be explained away with a word or two." [^5]
The convergence with global postmodernism, Wang Shuo claims, only
characterizes the decadent culture produced outside the Chinese
mainland: "Friends who sell paintings have a concept: the Southeast
Asian Circle of Cultural Vulgarity. The term refers to a Chinese
bourgeois aesthetics that centers around Hong Kong and Taiwan and
influences the Xinmatai region. In recent years, this kind of aesthetics
has been encroaching on the mainland and gradually
succeeding."[@shuo-jin] As a wholesale rejection of a regional culture,
Wang Shuo's claims sound more like provocation than criticism. Regional
stereotyping aside, it is odd to target Jin Yong for postmodern
encroachment: his most active years of literary production were the
1960s, a generation earlier than Wang Shuo's; he enters Wang Shuo's
"recent years" mostly via the globally successful film and television
adaptations of his work. Then there is his strange allegation that all
culture from Hong Kong and Taiwan is vulgar: Wang Shuo, as we know, is a
popular writer; critics more commonly accuse *him* of vulgarity. Wang
Shuo sounds rather like the target of his critique---and not just in his
fiction, but in the pages of that critique itself: the "repetitive ...
long-winded" complaint against the genre reiterates the same points over
several pages, and the belligerent author seems to enjoy starting fights
without any discernable cause. Indeed, it is possible to consider Wang
Shuo as a mirror image of Jin Yong, only from a different region: in the
1990s, the proliferation of martial arts productions in Hong Kong and
Taiwan was paralleled only by the meteoric rise of Wang Shuo as a
literary rock star in mainland China.

One possible reading of Wang Shuo's hooligan literature, then, is to
understand it as the mainland's postmodern variation on the genre of
martial arts. Geremie Barmé, for instance, notes the similarities
between their protagonists: "One of the central values of the *liumang*
\[hooligans\], as of the knight-errant, was that of mate-ship, the
bonding of friends and associates that behooved a person to stick up for
his allies."[@barme-red 86] The hooligans and the knight-errant both
occupy a peculiar status in the Chinese social structure: the hooligans
sandwiched between the political elites and the lower class, and the
knight-errant forming a hierarchical and self-regulated martial arts
realm distinct from both the imperial government and its commoner
subjects. Barmé also points out that the fiercely combative dialogues
between Wang Shuo's characters resembles a physical fight between
masters of martial arts: "The knight-errant might delight in killing for
personal satisfaction or honor, but the *liumang* gets his thrills by
cutting someone to the quick."[@barme-red 85] Wang Shuo identifies the
trope in martial arts novels where two characters always fight it out
instead of talk it through; his own trope, then, is that the characters
always fight it out *by* talking it through. This parallel is made
explicit in *Playing for Thrills*: in an early chapter, Fang Yan
interrogates his hooligan friend Xu Xun about the murder mystery, while
a martial arts film is playing in the background. The fighting on screen
ends just as Fang Yan realizes that he cannot secure his alibi for the
murder: "'The way you say it makes me the culprit.' The bitter fight
between the monks and the long-hairs on the TV screen ended and peace
returned. Shouts of battle were replaced by a Cantonese song, gloomy
music to accompany the scrolling of film credits."[@WS 44/55]

But the parallel with martial arts novels only explains Wang Shuo's cast
of characters and their interactions. *Playing for Thrills*, most
importantly, is a work of crime fiction. We have previously taken Wang
Shuo at his word by treating crime fiction as a Western import, but in
doing so, we downplay the Chinese-specific itinerary of the genre. As
early as the Song dynasty, folklores and oral traditions tell of murder
mysteries and mythical occurrences that are later recorded and codified
under the term "公案 \[*gong'an*\]," or court-case, fiction. Specimens
from the time do not survive, but Ming-dynasty compilations of the genre
show that the stories are highly iterative, with most following a
three-part structure: some succinct background information about the
characters involved, followed by the criminal act itself, which is
examined and adjudicated in front of a benign and sometimes clairvoyant
local magistrate.[^6] Some of them, like Judge Bao, become household
names and are repeatedly revived in later adaptations. Elements of
martial arts were mixed into the genre in the Qing dynasty, and the
savior judge often find knight-errant figures to protect them from
retributions. In the twentieth century, however, the *gong'an* tradition
faded into relative obscurity, as Western detective novels---the likes
of Conan Doyle and Agatha Christie---began to be widely translated and
read. Chinese mainland authors in the 1980s, emerging from the state's
long prohibition on genre fiction, confront two historical precedents
when they attempt their own crime fiction: the Chinese court-case
tradition and Western whodunits.[^7] These are the two options, then,
that confront Wang Shuo when he writes *Playing for Thrills*.

It is easy to see how *Playing for Thrills* evokes American and British
detective fiction: the protagonist Fang Yan wanders through the
metropolis, conducts field investigations and questions potential
witnesses. His cigarette-fueled living-room resembles that of a bored
Sherlock Holmes conducting chemical experiments or meddling with drugs.
All that the detective sees and hears are presented to the readers, so
that we may accompany Fang Yan in piecing together, like an elaborate
jigsaw puzzle, the murder mystery that happened years ago. But *Playing
for Thrills* also takes as its content the genre of Chinese court-case
fictions. Barmé's observation that Wang Shuo's fiction resembles martial
arts novels is insightful, precisely because of the intermixing of
martial arts with the *gong'an* tradition. The novel has a frame
narrative that marks its genre. The end of the book has Fang Yan reading
the book that the readers have just finished: "The protagonist of my
book is a compulsive gambler who never does an honest day's work. One
day he finds himself suspected of murder. Forced to delve into his
memories by calling on old friends, he produces a book of life that is
missing seven of its pages."[@WS 250/324] The missing seven pages are
the days of the murder missing in Fang Yan's memory. "The book of life"
Fang Yan produces of his own accord, ignoring the policemen's advice
when they first visited his apartment: "'No fanciful sagas, now,' they
warned. 'We're not here for a good time or to nurture new literary
talent. Make up a story, and you'll wish you hadn't.'"[@WS 17/20]
*Playing for Thrills*, in other words, is a "fanciful saga," and as Wang
Shuo accuses of Jin Yong, "filled with fabrications." The word "演义
\[fanciful saga\]," indeed, evokes not only the Chinese classical novel
三国演义 *\[Romance of the Three Kingdoms\]*, considered to be another
inspiration for later martial arts novels, but the Qing-dynasty
*gong'an* novel 七侠五义 *\[The Seven Heroes and Five Gallants\]*, where
the benevolent Judge Bao recruits knight-errant figures for help. The
first half of the novel, where Fang Yan visits his childhood friends one
by one, also has an iterative chapter structure: a sketch of the meeting
place or some idle chitchat with the character under investigation,
followed by an interrogation regarding their relationship to Gao Yang,
the alleged victim of the murder, which finally gets incorporated into
Fang Yan's dreamscape at the end of every chapter, where his mind is
busy reconstructing the forgotten crime scene. This pattern falls under
Wang Shuo's criticism of Jin Yong: "the plot is repetitive, the style
longwinded"; but the repetitiveness comes from the tripartite structure
of traditional *gong'an* stories: background---criminal act---verdict.

*Playing for Thrills*, then, is a synthesis of both the Western
detective fictions and the Chinese *gong'an* tradition. But as a
postmodern novel, it also negates both of its precursor genres at the
level of content: amnesia persistently overtakes the narrative; Gao Yang
turns out to be alive anyway; Feng Xiaogang, whose headless corpse the
police discovered, committed suicide; the murder mystery is in fact an
elaborate game among the hooligans that frames Fang Yan as the murderer;
the recounting of the investigation stops abruptly, midway during Fang
Yan's train journey, suspended, as in Simon's *Conducting Bodies*,
between destinations. Traditional *gong'an* fictions, meanwhile, do not
look for rational explanations for the how and why of the crime, as do
their Western counterparts, but rather seek a restoration of
justice---the good and lawful rewarded, often with cash prizes, and the
morally decadent jailed or executed. No justice is restored, of course,
in the inconclusive ending of *Playing for Thrills*. The hooligans
return to their respective positions in life, seemingly undisturbed.
Where the iterative *gong'an* structure calls for the benevolent
magistrate's verdict, furthermore, Wang Shuo fills it in with Fang Yan's
phantasmagoric dreams, persistently denying a coherent recapitulation of
the court-case. In *Playing for Thrills*, it is not only that the judge
is incompetent; we no longer find any stability or reassurance in the
postmodern courthouse, adjudicating nothing. This, then, is Wang Shuo's
own convergence, despite Chinese-specific content, with global
postmodernism.

[^1]: *Star Wars*, of course, is itself borrowing from Japanese samurai
    films.

[^2]: English does have the curious tendency of swapping out "tiger" for
    "dragon": in the 1990s, the four high-growth economies of Hong Kong,
    Singapore, Taiwan and South Korea are called "Four Asian Tigers" in
    English, but "Four Asian Little Dragons" in Chinese---"little
    dragon," or *xiaolong*, is Bruce Lee's first name.

[^3]: He is also born, as commentators are eager to point out, in the
    year of the Dragon. The color patterns of his costume are yellow and
    red, the traditional Chinese colors for a dragon.

[^4]: For an English-language overview of the controversy, see [@hamm].

[^5]: [@shuo-jin]. The title marks the article as among a series of Wang
    Shuo's denigrations of literary idols, past iterations of which
    include "我看鲁迅 \[I read Lu Xun\]" and "我看老舍 \[I read Lao
    She\]," but also "我看王朔 \[I read Wang Shuo\]," where he reserves
    the most scathing criticism for himself. It is entirely possible
    that his article on martial arts is tongue-in-cheek, and the
    overgeneralizations entirely self-conscious.

[^6]: The best examples for this structure are from the late-Ming
    *gong'an* collection [@judge-bao].

[^7]: Jeffrey Kinkley, whose historical account of Chinese crime fiction
    we primarily follow here, gives the two subgenres different names:
    "There were two major genres or subgenres, here termed the 'whodunit
    with Chinese characteristics' and the 'penal law melodrama.'"
    [@kinkley-law 21].
