\clearpage

\begin{figure}
\centering
\begin{multicols}{2}
\includegraphics[height=8cm]{mao}
\caption{Mao Zedong}\label{fig:3}

\includegraphics[height=8cm]{father}
\caption{Luo Zhongli, \emph{Father}}\label{fig:4}

\includegraphics[height=8cm]{warhol}
\caption{Andy Warhol, \emph{Mao}}\label{fig:5}

\includegraphics[height=8cm]{material}
\caption{Zhang Hongtu, \emph{Material Mao}}\label{fig:6}
\end{multicols}
\end{figure}

# "The landscape is motorized."

But it is Andy Warhol, not Wang Shuo, who demonstrates most clearly that
Chinese postmodernism cannot simply be postmodernism with Chinese
content. Between 1972 and 1973, after Nixon's visit to China, Warhol
created 199 silkscreen paintings of the country's leader, Mao Zedong.
The portrait on the cover of *Quotations from Chairman Mao* is
reproduced in brilliant splashes of color, the same techniques Warhol
employed on the publicity stills of Marilyn Monroe, only transposed onto
the iconic Chinese political leader. In 1972, China was still at the
height of the Cultural Revolution. The sheer number of paintings in
Warhol's Mao series is itself a commentary on the oversaturation of
cultural icons in advanced capitalism, but no market-driven mass
production can compare with the ubiquity of Mao's image in China.
Commentators, whenever they touch on the topic, are eager to point out
that "Mao's portrait is the single most reproduced portrait in human
history," with an estimate of 2.2 billion copies produced by 1979.[@mittler 303]
Those unfamiliar with the social context might even conclude that
China's Mao images were already postmodern---even before Warhol---as one
might argue that Campbell's soup cans were already postmodern, even
before Warhol blew them up to gallery proportions. The suggestion would
not be entirely unconvincing: if every citizen on average owns three
portraits of Mao, we are well beyond the loss of aura in the age of
mechanical reproduction. What is left, if we are to imagine the Cultural
Revolution from our own present, is a sense of depthlessness:
"politics," the signifier that has lost its signified in the political
turmoil, is henceforth nothing but the gloaming on the surface of
romanticized, hypermasculine worker images or the grandiose but empty
slogans of Party propaganda.

This, however, would be a decontextualized reading of Chinese culture
during the Cultural Revolution. Mao images became postmodern much later
than when they were first popularized, and not only because of
censorship: Chinese people at the time did believe that Mao was going to
lead China into a more prosperous socialism, and often subscribed to the
myth of the nation. However tumultuous the decade of the Cultural
Revolution, China still had a stable Symbolic Order that positioned Mao
as the all-knowing and ever-benevolent father figure---perhaps only
temporarily deceived by the Gang of Four. Chinese culture in the 1980s,
furthermore, did not immediately abandon all grand narratives about the
nation's future, but rather seemed to witness an explosion of them. To
understand a postmodernism that is specifically Chinese---that is,
emerging from China's unique socio-historical context after the Cultural
Revolution---one must confront this transition period that links the
country's socialist heritage on the one end, and on the other end the
more full-blown versions of postmodernism in the 1990s, where the legacy
of socialism is rendered increasingly illegible.

We begin, then, with what looks like a revival of realism immediately
after the end of the Cultural Revolution, Luo Zhongli's famous 1980
painting *Father*. Despite the title, the figure in the painting is not
Luo Zhongli's own father. His prototype is a destitute cleaning worker
that the artist encountered one rainy night outside a public restroom,
and his facial features are composited from portrait photographs of many
other peasants from across China. Just behind him we see the handles of
a traditional Chinese rake. The "father," then, is symbolic: it is an
abstraction of China's peasant class, who carried the weight of feeding
and raising an entire nation on its shoulders, and in the process has
become battered and old. The background looks like an infinite field of
golden crops ripe for harvest. The old peasant crouches before what is
presumably the products of his labor and, in respite, holds a bowl of
tea in his hands. He has disproportionally large hands, wrinkled and
veiny much like his face, and his index finger has been bandaged. There
is something passionate in the brush strokes of the golden field, an
eagerness in the peasant's half-opened mouth, in his dark and sunken
eyes that grapple the onlooker, that the painting does not exhibit the
somber indifference of, for instance, Walker Evans's American realism,
but recalls instead Van Gogh's famous peasant boots: "In them, there
vibrates the silent call of the earth, its quiet gift of ripening corn
and its enigmatic self-refusal in the fallow desolation of the wintry
field."[@heidegger 14] Part of the energy, perhaps, comes from an Oedipal tension.
The portrait, indeed, is a counter-image of Mao: to focus on an
anonymous peasant figure and claiming him as China's true father is to
dislodge Mao from his mythical position as the revolutionary father. The
sun is routinely used as a symbol for Mao, but here, in the relentless
heat of the sun, the peasant, sweating profusely, can barely open his
eyes. The deep wrinkles seem not only to carve into his face, but also
insistently into the immaculate, almost deity-like surface of Mao's
countless portraits, dismantling their monopoly on the nation's
consciousness.

What, then, happens to the Symbolic Order after Mao? For one thing, the
painting seems to give more than one answer. Luo Zhongli's *Father* is
sometimes considered an instance of what is later called China's
"root-seeking movement \[寻根运动\]," where writers and artists try to
find China's missing cultural origin, disrupted by the political
violence of the Cultural Revolution. The depiction of a peasant and his
rake, then, is quite literally a return to the roots, that is, to
agriculture, and to the oppressed and impoverished peasant class that
once led to the success of the Chinese revolution. But Luo's focus is
not on the peasant collective, directing our view, instead, to an
individual, which coincides with early 1980s influxes of liberal
humanism in China. The tea bowl, meanwhile, adorned with symbols from
folk traditions, seems to call for a return to a kind of
traditionalism---perhaps even to a feudal way of life, to indigenous
myths and narratives that existed before socialism or liberalism.

One more alternative, however, comes from the genre of the painting. We
have treated *Father* as a work of realism. Luo Zhongli, however, claims
that he is inspired by the American *photo*realist artist and
photographer Chuck Close and his massive human portraits. At first
glance, the resemblance is largely superficial: perhaps Luo reuses the
composition, the abstracted background, and the portrait's glare at its
onlookers, but certainly not the glossy, reflective finish
characteristic of American photorealism, and particularly prominent on
the glasses of Close's characters. But postmodernism's gleaming surface
is carefully tucked away in Luo's painting as well: the tip of a blue
ballpoint pen, in sharp contrast with the earthy colors of the painting,
just above the old peasant's left ear. In *Father*, then, Van Gogh's
peasant boots have the heels of Warhol's *Diamond Dust Shoes.* The
implication, supposedly, is that the peasant is literate, a testament to
the success of the Party's literacy campaigns. The presence of the
ballpoint pen, though, functions like Roland Barthes's punctum, so that
the viewers, once they notice it, are displaced from their quiet
nostalgia towards an agrarian ideal. It is, in that sense, also a marker
for a period shift: China, newly under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping
and undergoing market reform, is no longer the old agricultural country
it once was. Commentary on the painting usually claims that the pen is
behind the peasant's ear, which would probably be the more realistic
placement. But its placement is more bizarre than that, since half of
the pen is tucked under the turban, so that it looks rather
uncomfortably thrust into the peasant's brain. It is perhaps significant
that the artist never intended to include the pen, but was forced to do
so by the judges of a painting competition he participated in, on the
grounds that, without the pen, the peasant would not belong to Deng's
New Era. Whether one wants it or not, postmodernism presents itself as a
new and shiny ideology with the dawn of the market reforms.

The figure of Mao, displaced by the plethora of alternative ideologies
at the turn of the decade, can now be invoked again to disassociate it
further from its revolutionary myth. Luo Zhongli's *Father*, in this
sense, is a precursor to a fatherless postmodernism. Zhang Hongtu, in
his series *Material Mao*, cuts out silhouettes of the Chairman on a
variety of materials. The obsessive return to Mao, then, can only
reproduce his outline; the figure itself is consistently missing. Zhu
Wei has Mao blindfolded by a piece of red cloth, evoking Cui Jian's
censored but highly popular rock classic, "A Piece of Red Cloth"---Mao,
then, becomes a rock star. Liu Anping's video, *Counterrevolutionary
Slogan*, restages the defacement of Mao's portrait over the Tiananmen
Square in 1989. The distorted image and the reenactment of Mao by the
artist, though, occasionally makes the Chairman look like his civil war
rival, Chiang Kai-shek, thus causing an indeterminate fluctuation
between their rival identities. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the Deng era
also brings Warhol, finally, to the Chinese version of political pop: Yu
Youhan combines Warhol's Monroe with Mao, whereas Zhang Hongtu puts the
Chairman's face on a can of "Old-Fashioned Quaker Oats."[^3] But
Warhol's Mao never exerted the same commanding influence as China's Mao
did in people's collective psyche. The historical context of the
Cultural Revolution reveals that there was indeed a time when Mao's
image was passionately produced as a symbol for the revolution, so that
even a Chinese postmodernism that most resembles its Western counterpart
has a strange unevenness: a sense that, despite the thoroughgoing
pastiche, a desire for the revolution still returns, hauntingly, as the
repressed thing.

Before we return to *Playing for Thrills*, we should clarify the
relationship between the mythical-revolutionary figure of Mao and the
hooligans of Wang Shuo: hooligan literature, indeed, is intimately bound
to the historical context of Chinese socialism. The word "hooligan"
appears in Mao's 1927 political treatise, titled "Report on an
Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan": "The right-wing of the
Kuomintang says, 'The peasant movement is a movement of the
\[hooligans\], of the lazy peasants.'"[^4] Mao's key insight in the
article, meanwhile, is that the peasant class is a vital force of the
Chinese revolution: "the peasants have accomplished a revolutionary task
which had been left unaccomplished for many years and have done an
important job for the national revolution."[@mao] This unexpected
genealogy of the term, then, means that hooligans, within the Chinese
historical context, are at one point revolutionaries.[^6] One might even
say that Mao, born into a peasant family in Hunan where he conducted his
investigation, is a hooligan himself: a young and passionate radical,
occupying a marginal position in turbulent times, who nevertheless
receives first-rate education[^7] and aspires to transform the social
order around him. Wang Shuo's hooligans are therefore post-Mao in this
ambiguous sense: as second-generation revolutionaries, their unique
identity offers them not only the privilege attached to the ruling
class, but also a sense that they are the direct inheritors of the
socialist ideal, and that they will be called upon by the nation to
perform the duties of their previous generation. Here, then, is the
question for Wang Shuo: What is the fate of the hooligans where there is
no longer a revolution?

One answer we already know: the hooligans, much like the figure of Mao,
found themselves thrown into the sea of capitalist innovations,
unprecedented in a previously socialist state. In *Playing for Thrills*,
when the gambling group is bragging in front of Fang Yan's house guests,
one of them, Fat Man Wu, declares: "Our pal here's a writer ... You must
have read \[Fang Yan's\] stuff. The only book with a larger print run is
*Selected Works of Chairman Mao*."[@WS 36/44-5] The scene is a classic enactment
of hooligan-style seduction, which has the Freudian structure of a joke:
Fat Man Wu, the joke-teller; Fang Yan, the listener; Li Jiangyun, the
female spectator and the recipient of the hooligans' sexual aggressions.
For the joke to work, Fang Yan must imagine himself participating in the
scenario that the joke-teller describes, which is easy enough: as the
frame narrative of the novel demonstrates, Fang Yan is indeed a writer,
authoring *Playing for Thrills* itself. It is tempting to associate this
imaginary Fang Yan as a bestselling author with Wang Shuo himself, all
the more because, as the bragging continues, we are told that "he's made
movies."[@WS 37/45] But the punchline of the joke connects Fang Yan with
another popular author, since Fat Man Wu assigns him the pen name Qiong
Yao---a bestselling martial arts author from Taiwan, whose works gained
an enormous following in the mainland during the 1980s. The parallel
between these popular authors and Mao trivializes the latter: his
*Selected Works*, after the market reform, is just another commodity to
be consumed, comparable to other popular culture items such as martial
arts novels or *Playing for Thrills*. Fat Man Wu's joke also implies
that reproducibility is the surefire way to fame, a claim which Warhol,
for one, would wholeheartedly endorse: "The only book with a larger
print run is *Selected Works of Chairman Mao*." The hooligans, then, no
longer resemble Mao, their revolutionary forefather. In the Deng era,
the figure of Mao, popularized and commodified, is dragged into the
midst of a different type of hooligans, that of a group of playfully
cynical consumerists. Wang Shuo, in an earlier novella, has one of his
characters say, again in front of a female spectator, "No, \[I have\]
nothing to do with hooligan; they said that I am a 'young
reformer.'"[@shuo-sea] "Hooligan," then, has evolved its meaning from a
revolutionary peasant to a participant of the market reforms, eager to
earn sexual favors as much as financial profits.

But the hooligans in *Playing for Thrills* also try to retrieve their
revolutionary fantasy, which can be seen in their collective
reminiscence of Zhuo Yue. His figure persistently reappears in Fang
Yan's reconstruction of the restaurant scene, even though Zhuo Yue could
not have been at the restaurant: "He wasn't even alive then. A year
before our discharge he was lost to us in a shipboard accident."[@WS 10/12]
What we learn, then, is that Zhuo Yue was in the navy, a rarity at the
time: the PLA led by Mao failed to take over the KMT-controlled Taiwan
in 1949, because the newly founded People's Republic lacked a navy.
Becoming a military hero was commonly heralded as the ultimate life
accomplishment for those born before the market reforms, and for the
second-generation revolutionaries the perfect way to imitate their
fathers and defend the socialist legacy.[^12] Even though most of the
hooligans were enlisted at one point, Zhuo Yue's identity as a sailor
patrolling the borders of the country marks him as distinctive,[^13]
since, in Fang Yan's recollection, he is notably the only one at the
table "\[d\]ressed in white navy trousers."[@WS 10/12]

No one, however, remembers what exactly happened to Zhuo Yue. He was
killed during his time in the navy and therefore unrelated to the murder
mystery, but a long stretch of unattributed dialogue among the hooligans
blurs the circumstances of his death:

> "I really miss Zhuo Yue ... Our pal was part of the mission, and got
> crushed by Sea Eagle Number 1."
>
> "What's that? I thought you said Zhuo Yue died by banging his head on
> a ship's ladder as he was running into the gallery to get some stuffed
> buns hot out of the oven."
>
> "That's bullshit. We fired a missile at a Taiwanese ship, and the
> damned thing did a one-eighty and came right back at us. Everybody
> ran, everybody but Zhuo Yue, who stood on deck and tried to catch the
> incoming missile. The dumb fuck, how can you catch a flying missile?
> It blew him to bits."
>
> "No no that's not what happened, that's the official explanation. What
> really happened is that they scheduled target practice for
> hundred-thirty-millimeter guns, and Zhuo Yue, who was on the tow ship,
> was afraid the gunners might be off target, so he ordered a
> ten-thousand-meter cable from the factory. Well, they aimed at the
> target tow, but the shell headed straight for the tow ship, off target
> by ten thousand meters, and blew our pal to bits. You should know, you
> fired the shot, and when you saw where it went you stood on the
> platform like an idiot."
>
> "Those were the Gang of Four days, after all, so you could say just
> about anything you wanted, right?"[@WS 199-200/253-4]

Zhuo Yue died three different ways: banging his head against the ladder
in a moment of unbridled gluttony, blown into bits by a malfunctioning
missile ("Sea Eagle Number 1"), and killed in a mishap during target
exercise. The discussion sound less like a group of informants
recounting the last moments of a lost friend, but instead like a
competition for the most extravagant story. The ladder scenario is
simply absurd, but it can also happen to anyone hungry for some
fresh-from-the-oven buns, and not just a distinguished soldier in the
navy. The navy, in any case, is also absurd, since it apparently fires
boomerang missiles, and Zhuo Yue's mock-heroic attempt to catch one with
his bare hands satirizes propagandist fantasies of the inhuman strength
of PLA soldiers. The story about the target exercise goes into
unnecessary details, specifying the caliber of the guns and the length
of the tow cable, but these numbers merely call attention to the
exaggerated nature of the narrative. What makes this scenario almost
believable is how it discredits the missile story: "that's the official
explanation." Zhuo Yue's death, then, is shrouded beneath a conspiracy
theory, which involves government cover-ups for the incompetence of its
military. We still do not know for certain if any of these scenarios is
how Zhuo Yue died, an uncertainty generated by the freeplay of
signifiers, by the emptying-out of the genre of traditional court-case
fictions, and by the no longer viable revolutionary legacy. Hooligans,
within their historical context, are amnesiac of the revolutionary ideal
that they once inherited and that now only exist as a relentlessly
ridiculed fantasy. The phantom existence of Zhuo Yue also feels like a
diversion in *Playing for Thrills*, a side-plot that distracts its
readers from pursuing the real murder mystery, the cause of which
remains out of view. But this, too, is the effect of Wang Shuo's
postmodernism: the dismantling of socialist revolution as the grand
narrative of China makes the pursuit of the Real of history, by
definition inaccessible, even more futile.

It is strange, then, that according to one participant of the dialogue,
the collapse of all grand narratives is restricted to the Cultural
Revolution: "Those *were* the Gang of Four days," which implies that in
the present tense of the hooligans, people cannot "say just about
anything" they want. But the opposite is true: people in the Cultural
Revolution, afraid of political repercussions, were extremely afraid of
saying anything out of line with the Party ideology. It is not until
after the Cultural Revolution that Fang Yan's gang of friends can
fabricate identities and memories and manage to get away with them
unscathed. These stories, then, are motivated by a different historical
context, that of the market reform. In the ladder scenario, Zhuo Yue is
overcome by a desire for material goods, "stuffed buns fresh off the
stove." The missile is fired, further, when Zhuo Yue is on a failed
mission to retrieve gold ingots from the sea: "The *Awa Maru* was
refloated, but there were none of those gold ingots we need for our four
modernizations, nothing but eight thousand Japanese cremation
urns."[@WS 199/254] The fantastical scene is symbolic: "sea," during the Deng
reforms, is a common metaphor for the newly opened capitalist market;
the popular phrase "going to sea," for example, means "starting a
private business." Zhuo Yue, in other words, died in the Chinese
equivalent of a gold rush, sacrificing himself rather pointlessly for
Deng's Four Modernizations. It seems, then, that we have found the
murderer of Zhuo Yue: capitalism killed him. The murder, further,
results not so much in the death of Zhuo Yue, but more in the hooligans'
failure at retrieving their revolutionary legacy or reconstructing a
narrative of their past. We are, in that sense, approaching the origin
of their collective schizophrenia, the trauma of history. But what kind
of postmodernism allows one to glimpse, however fleetingly, the moment
of historical trauma?

[^3]: Examples from this paragraph are mostly taken from [@lago].

[^4]: [@mao]. The original translation renders "痞子 \[*pizi*\]" as "riffraff," but it is the same word in Wang Shuo's "痞子文学 \[*pizi wenxue*\]," which is most often translated as
    "hooligan literature."

[^6]: This connection between hooligans and Maoist revolutionaries is
    made in [@yibing].

[^7]: Mao attended the First Normal School of Changsha, then considered
    the best post-secondary institution in Hunan province.

[^12]: "The only thing worth fantasizing is a war between China and the
    Soviet Union. I enthusiastically hope to be swept into a world war,
    and do not doubt for a second that the iron fist of the People's
    Liberation Army will smash the war machines of the Soviet Union and
    the United States. I will then become a world-renowned war hero. For
    the liberation of all peoples of the world, I carry inescapable
    responsibilities." [@shuo-ferocious].

[^13]: His name, "卓越 \[Zhuo Yue\]," means "distinction" in Chinese. It
    is unclear whether anyone else in Fang Yan's gang was in the navy,
    but this ambiguity is part of Wang Shuo's narrative strategy, as is
    discussed below.
